<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/ vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Poetry</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="to-my-father" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To My Father</h2>
I.

Take of the first fruits, Father, of thy care,
  Wrapped in the fresh leaves of my gratitude
  Late waked for early gifts ill understood;
Claiming in all my harvests rightful share,
Whether with song that mounts the joyful air
  I praise my God; or, in yet deeper mood,
  Sit dumb because I know a speechless good,
Needing no voice, but all the soul for prayer.
  Thou hast been faithful to my highest need;
And I, thy debtor, ever, evermore,
Shall never feel the grateful burden sore.
  Yet most I thank thee, not for any deed,
  But for the sense thy living self did breed
That fatherhood is at the great world's core.


II.

All childhood, reverence clothed thee, undefined,
  As for some being of another race;
  Ah! not with it departing--grown apace
As years have brought me manhood's loftier mind
Able to see thy human life behind--
  The same hid heart, the same revealing face--
  My own dim contest settling into grace
Of sorrow, strife, and victory combined.
  So I beheld my God, in childhood's morn,
A mist, a darkness, great, and far apart,
Moveless and dim--I scarce could say _Thou art_:
  My manhood came, of joy and sadness born--
  Full soon the misty dark, asunder torn,
Revealed man's glory, God's great human heart.

G.M.D. Jr.

Algiers, April, 1857.
		</article>
		<article id="a-hidden-life" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Hidden Life</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Proudly the youth, sudden with manhood crowned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went walking by his horses, the first time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That morning, to the plough. No soldier gay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feels at his side the throb of the gold hilt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Knowing the blue blade hides within its sheath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As lightning in the cloud) with more delight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When first he belts it on, than he that day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heard still the clank of the plough-chains against</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His horses' harnessed sides, as to the field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They went to make it fruitful. O'er the hill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sun looked down, baptizing him for toil.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A farmer's son, a farmer's grandson he;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, his great-grandsire had possessed those fields.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tradition said they had been tilled by men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who bore the name long centuries ago,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And married wives, and reared a stalwart race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And died, and went where all had followed them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save one old man, his daughter, and the youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who ploughs in pride, nor ever doubts his toil;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And death is far from him this sunny morn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why should we think of death when life is high?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The earth laughs all the day, and sleeps all night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The daylight's labour and the night's repose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are very good, each better in its time.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The boy knew little; but he read old tales</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Scotland's warriors, till his blood ran swift</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As charging knights upon their death-career.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He chanted ancient tunes, till the wild blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was charmed back into its fountain-well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tears arose instead. That poet's songs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose music evermore recalls his name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His name of waters babbling as they run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rose from him in the fields among the kine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And met the skylark's, raining from the clouds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But only as the poet-birds he sang—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From rooted impulse of essential song;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The earth was fair—he knew not it was fair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His heart was glad—he knew not it was glad;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He walked as in a twilight of the sense—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which this one day shall turn to tender morn.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Long ere the sun had cleared the feathery tops</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the fir-thicket on the eastward hill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His horses leaned and laboured. Each great hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Held rein and plough-stilt in one guiding grasp—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No ploughman there would brook a helper. Proud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a true ploughman's pride—nobler, I think,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than statesman's, ay, or poet's, or painter's pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For little praise will come that he ploughs well—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He did plough well, proud of his work itself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And not of what would follow. With sure eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He saw his horses keep the arrow-track;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He saw the swift share cut the measured sod;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He saw the furrow folding to the right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ready with nimble foot to aid at need:—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turning its secrets upward to the sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hiding in the dark the sun-born grass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And daisies dipped in carmine, lay the tilth—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A million graves to nurse the buried seed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And send a golden harvest up the air.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When the steep sun had clomb to his decline,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pausing seemed, at edge of slow descent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the keystone of his airy bridge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They rested likewise, half-tired man and horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And homeward went for food and courage new.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therewith refreshed, they turned again to toil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lived in labour all the afternoon;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till, in the gloaming, once again the plough</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lay like a stranded bark upon the lea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And home with hanging neck the horses went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Walking beside their master, force by will:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then through the lengthening shades a vision came.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It was a lady mounted on a horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A slender girl upon a mighty steed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That bore her with the pride horses must feel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When they submit to women. Home she went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone, or else her groom lagged far behind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scarce had she bent simple acknowledgment</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the hand in silent salutation lifted</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the bowed head, when something faithless yielded:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The saddle slipped, the horse stopped, and the girl</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood on her feet, still holding fast the reins.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Three paces bore him bounding to her side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her radiant beauty almost fixed him there;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But with main force, as one that grapples fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He threw the fascination off, and saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The work before him. Soon his hand and knife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had set the saddle firmer than before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the gentle horse; and then he turned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To mount the maiden. But bewilderment</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A moment lasted; for he knew not how,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With stirrup-hand and steady arm, to throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Elastic, on her steed, the ascending maid:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A moment only; for while yet she thanked,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor yet had time to teach her further will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About her waist he put his brawny hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That all but zoned her round; and like a child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lifting her high, he set her on the horse;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whence like a risen moon she smiled on him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor turned aside, although a radiant blush</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shone in her cheek, and shadowed in her eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he was never sure if from her heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or from the rosy sunset came the flush.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again she thanked him, while again he stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bewildered in her beauty. Not a word</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Answered her words that flowed, folded in tones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round which dissolving lambent music played,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like dropping water in a silver cup;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till, round the shoulder of the neighbouring hill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sudden she disappeared. And he awoke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And called himself hard names, and turned and went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After his horses, bending like them his head.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ah God! when Beauty passes from the door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although she came not in, the house is bare:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shut, shut the door; there's nothing in the house!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why seems it always that she should be ours?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A secret lies behind which thou dost know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And I can partly guess.</span>
					<span>But think not then,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The holder of the plough sighed many sighs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his bed that night; or other dreams</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than pleasant rose upon his view in sleep;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor think the airy castles of his brain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had less foundation than the air admits.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But read my simple tale, scarce worth the name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And answer, if he had not from the fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beauty's best gift; and proved her not, in sooth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An angel vision from a higher world.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Not much of her I tell. Her glittering life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where part the waters on the mountain-ridge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ran down the southern side, away from his.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was not over-blessed; for, I know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its tale wiled many sighs, one summer eve,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From her who told, and him who, in the pines</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Walking, received it from her loving lips;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now she was as God had made her, ere</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The world had tried to spoil her; tried, I say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And half succeeded, failing utterly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fair was she, frank, and innocent as a child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That looks in every eye; fearless of ill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because she knew it not; and brave withal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because she led a simple country life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And loved the animals. Her father's house—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Scottish laird was he, of ancient name—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was distant but two miles among the hills;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet oft as she had passed his father's farm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The youth had never seen her face before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And should not twice. Yet was it not enough?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The vision tarried. She, as the harvest moon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That goeth on her way, and knoweth not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fields of corn whose ripening grain she fills</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With strength of life, and hope, and joy for men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went on her way, and knew not of the virtue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gone out of her; yea, never thought of him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save at such times when, all at once, old scenes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Return uncalled, with wonder that they come.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon was she orphaned of her sheltering hills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rounded with dead glitter, not the shine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of leaves and waters dancing in the sun;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While he abode in ever breaking dawns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Breathed ever new-born winds into his soul;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And saw the aurora of the heavenly day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still climb the hill-sides of the heapy world.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Again I say, no fond romance of love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No argument of possibilities,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If he were some one, and she sought his help,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turned his clear brain into a nest of dreams.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As soon he had sat down and twisted cords</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To snare, and carry home for household help,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some woman-angel, wandering half-seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On moonlight wings, o'er withered autumn fields.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when he rose next morn, and went abroad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(The exultation of his new-found rank</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Already settling into dignity,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behold, the earth was beautiful! The sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shone with the expectation of the sun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only the daisies grieved him, for they fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Caught in the furrow, with their innocent heads</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just out, imploring. A gray hedgehog ran,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With tangled mesh of rough-laid spikes, and face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Helplessly innocent, across the field:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He let it run, and blessed it as it ran.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Returned at noon-tide, something drew his feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the barn: entering, he gazed and stood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For, through the rent roof lighting, one sunbeam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blazed on the yellow straw one golden spot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dulled all the amber heap, and sinking far,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like flame inverted, through the loose-piled mound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crossed the keen splendour with dark shadow-straws,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In lines innumerable. 'Twas so bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His eye was cheated with a spectral smoke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That rose as from a fire. He had not known</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How beautiful the sunlight was, not even</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the windy fields of morning grass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor on the river, nor the ripening corn!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if to catch a wild live thing, he crept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On tiptoe silent, laid him on the heap,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gazing down into the glory-gulf,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dreamed as a boy half sleeping by the fire—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half dreaming rose, and got his horses out.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>God, and not woman, is the heart of all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But she, as priestess of the visible earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Holding the key, herself most beautiful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had come to him, and flung the portals wide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He entered: every beauty was a glass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That gleamed the woman back upon his view.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall I not rather say: each beauty gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its own soul up to him who worshipped her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For that his eyes were opened now to see?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Already in these hours his quickened soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Put forth the white tip of a floral bud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere long to be a crown-like, aureole flower.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His songs unbidden, his joy in ancient tales,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had hitherto alone betrayed the seed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That lay in his heart, close hidden even from him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet not the less mellowing all his spring:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like summer sunshine came the maiden's face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the youth's glad heart the seed awoke.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It grew and spread, and put forth many flowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its every flower a living open eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until his soul was full of eyes within.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each morning now was a fresh boon to him;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each wind a spiritual power upon his life;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each individual animal did share</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A common being with him; every kind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of flower from every other was distinct,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uttering that for which alone it was—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its something human, wrapt in other veil.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And when the winter came, when thick the snow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Armed the sad fields from gnawing of the frost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the low sun but skirted his far realms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sank in early night, he drew his chair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the fire; and by the feeble lamp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Read book on book; and wandered other climes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lived in other lives and other needs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And grew a larger self by other selves.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere long, the love of knowledge had become</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hungry passion and a conscious power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And craved for more than reading could supply.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, through the night (all dark, except the moon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shone frosty o'er the heath, or the white snow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave back such motes of light as else had sunk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the dark earth) he bent his plodding way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the moors to where the little town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lay gathered in the hollow. There the student</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who taught from lingering dawn to early dark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had older scholars in the long fore-night;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For youths who in the shop, or in the barn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or at the loom, had done their needful work,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came gathering there through starlight, fog, or snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And found the fire ablaze, the candles lit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And him who knew waiting for who would know.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here mathematics wiled him to their heights;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And strange consent of lines to form and law</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made Euclid a profound romance of truth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The master saw with wonder how he seized,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How eagerly devoured the offered food,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And longed to give him further kinds. For Knowledge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would multiply like Life; and two clear souls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That see a truth, and, turning, see at once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each the other's face glow in that truth's delight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are drawn like lovers. So the master offered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To guide the ploughman through the narrow ways</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To heights of Roman speech. The youth, alert,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Caught at the offer; and for years of nights,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The house asleep, he groped his twilight way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With lexicon and rule, through ancient story,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or fable fine, embalmed in Latin old;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherein his knowledge of the English tongue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through reading many books, much aided him—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For best is like in all the hearts and tongues.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>At length his progress, through the master's pride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In such a pupil, reached the father's ears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great gladness woke within him, and he vowed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If caring, sparing might accomplish it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He should to college, and there have his fill</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Of that same learning.</span>
					<span>To the plough no more,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All day to school he went; and ere a year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wore the scarlet gown with the closed sleeves.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Awkward at first, but with a dignity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon finding fit embodiment in speech</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gesture and address, he made his way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unconscious all, to the full-orbed respect</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of students and professors; for whose praise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More than his worth, society, so called,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To its rooms in that great city of the North,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Invited him. He entered. Dazzled at first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By brilliance of the shining show, the lights,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mirrors, gems, white necks, and radiant eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stole into a corner, and was quiet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until the vision too had quieter grown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bewildered next by many a sparkling word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor knowing the light-play of polished minds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, like rose-diamonds cut in many facets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Catch and reflect the wandering rays of truth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if they were home-born and issuing new,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He held his peace, and silent soon began</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see how little fire it needs to shimmer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hence, in the midst of talk, his thoughts would wander</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back to the calm divine of homely toil;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While round him still and ever hung an air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of breezy fields, and plough, and cart, and scythe—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A kind of clumsy grace, in which gay girls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw but the clumsiness—another sort</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw the grace too, yea, sometimes, when he spoke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw the grace only; and began at last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he sought none, to seek him in the crowd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And find him unexpected, maiden-wise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But oftener far they sought him than they found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For seldom was he drawn away from toil;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seldomer stinted time held due to toil;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For if one night his panes were dark, the next</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They gleamed far into morning. And he won</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Honours among the first, each session's close.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nor think that new familiarity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With open forms of ill, not to be shunned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where many youths are met, endangered much</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mind that had begun to will the pure.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oft when the broad rich humour of a jest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With breezy force drew in its skirts a troop</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of pestilential vapours following—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arose within his sudden silent mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The maiden face that once blushed down on him—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That lady face, insphered beyond his earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet visible as bright, particular star.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A flush of tenderness then glowed across</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His bosom—shone it clean from passing harm:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should that sweet face be banished by rude words?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It could not stay what maidens might not hear!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He almost wept for shame, that face, such jest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should meet in <i>his</i> house. To his love he made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love's only worthy offering—purity.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And if the homage that he sometimes met,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New to the country lad, conveyed in smiles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Assents, and silent listenings when he spoke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Threatened yet more his life's simplicity;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An antidote of nature ever came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even Nature's self. For, in the summer months,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His former haunts and boyhood's circumstance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Received him to the bosom of their grace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he, too noble to despise the past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too proud to be ashamed of manly toil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too wise to fancy that a gulf gaped wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Betwixt the labouring hand and thinking brain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or that a workman was no gentleman</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because a workman, clothed himself again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his old garments, took the hoe, the spade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sowing sheet, or covered in the grain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smoothing with harrows what the plough had ridged.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With ever fresher joy he hailed the fields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Returning still with larger powers of sight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each time he knew them better than before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet their sweetest aspect was the old.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His labour kept him true to life and fact,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Casting out worldly judgments, false desires,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And vain distinctions. Ever, at his toil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New thoughts would rise, which, when God's night awoke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He still would seek, like stars, with instruments—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By science, or by truth's philosophy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bridging the gulf betwixt the new and old.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus laboured he with hand and brain at once,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor missed due readiness when Scotland's sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Met to reap wisdom, and the fields were white.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>His sire was proud of him; and, most of all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because his learning did not make him proud:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was too wise to build upon his lore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The neighbours asked what he would make his son:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"I'll make a man of him," the old man said;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"And for the rest, just what he likes himself.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He is my only son—I think he'll keep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The old farm on; and I shall go content,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaving a man behind me, as I say."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So four years long his life swung to and fro,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alternating the red gown and blue coat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The garret study and the wide-floored barn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wintry city and the sunny fields:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In every change his mind was well content,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For in himself he was the growing same.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In no one channel flowed his seeking thoughts;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To no profession did he ardent turn:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He knew his father's wish—it was his own.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Why should a man," he said, "when knowledge grows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave therefore the old patriarchal life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seek distinction in the noise of men?"</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He turned his asking face on every side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went reverent with the anatomist, and saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The inner form of man laid skilful bare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went with the chymist, whose wise-questioning hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made Nature do in little, before his eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And momently, what, huge, for centuries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the veil of vastness and lone deeps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She labours at; bent his inquiring eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On every source whence knowledge flows for men:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At some he only sipped, at others drank.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>At length, when he had gained the master's right—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By custom sacred from of old—to sit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With covered head before the awful rank</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of black-gowned senators; and each of those,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proud of the scholar, was ready at a word</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To speed him onward to what goal he would,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He took his books, his well-worn cap and gown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, leaving with a sigh the ancient walls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crowned with their crown of stone, unchanging gray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In all the blandishments of youthful spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chose for his world the lone ancestral farm.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With simple gladness met him on the road</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His gray-haired father—elder brother now.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Few words were spoken, little welcome said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, as they walked, the more was understood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If with a less delight he brought him home</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than he who met the prodigal returned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was with more reliance, with more peace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For with the leaning pride that old men feel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In young strong arms that draw their might from them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He led him to the house. His sister there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose kisses were not many, but whose eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were full of watchfulness and hovering love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Set him beside the fire in the old place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And heaped the table with best country-fare.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When the swift night grew deep, the father rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And led him, wondering why and where they went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thorough the limpid dark, by tortuous path</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between the corn-ricks, to a loft above</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stable, where the same old horses slept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which he had guided that eventful morn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Entering, he saw a change-pursuing hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had been at work. The father, leading on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across the floor, heaped high with store of grain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Opened a door. An unexpected light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flashed on him cheerful from a fire and lamp,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That burned alone, as in a fairy-tale:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behold! a little room, a curtained bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An easy chair, bookshelves, and writing-desk;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An old print of a deep Virgilian wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And one of choosing Hercules! The youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gazed and spoke not. The old paternal love</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had sought and found an incarnation new!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For, honouring in his son the simple needs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which his own bounty had begot in him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He gave him thus a lonely thinking space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A silent refuge. With a quiet good night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He left him dumb with love. Faintly beneath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The horses stamped, and drew the lengthening chain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Three sliding years, with slowly blended change,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew round their winter, summer, autumn, spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fulfilled of work by hands, and brain, and heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He laboured as before; though when he would,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Nature urged not, he, with privilege,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would spare from hours of toil—read in his room,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or wander through the moorland to the hills;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There on the apex of the world would stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As on an altar, burning, soul and heart—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself the sacrifice of faith and prayer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gaze in the face of the inviting blue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That domed him round; ask why it should be blue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pray yet again; and with love-strengthened heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go down to lower things with lofty cares.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When Sundays came, the father, daughter, son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Walked to the church across their own loved fields.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was an ugly church, with scarce a sign</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of what makes English churches venerable.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Likest a crowing cock upon a heap</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It stood—but let us say—St. Peter's cock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lacking not many a holy, rousing charm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For one with whose known self it was coeval,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dawning with it from darkness of the unseen!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And its low mounds of monumental grass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were far more solemn than great marble tombs;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For flesh is grass, its goodliness the flower.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh, lovely is the face of green churchyard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On sunny afternoons! The light itself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nestles amid the grass; and the sweet wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Says, <i>I am here</i>,—no more. With sun and wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And crowing cocks, who can believe in death?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He, on such days, when from the church they Came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And through God's ridges took their thoughtful way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The last psalm lingering faintly in their hearts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would look, inquiring where his ridge would rise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when it gloomed or rained, he turned aside:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>What mattered it to him?</span>
					<span>And as they walked</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Homeward, right well the father loved to hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fresh rills pouring from his son's clear well.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the old man clung not to the old alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor leaned the young man only to the new;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They would the best, they sought, and followed it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"The Pastor fills his office well," he said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In homely jest; "—the Past alone he heeds!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Honours those Jewish times as he were a Jew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Christ were neither Jew nor northern man!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He has no ear for this poor Present Hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which wanders up and down the centuries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like beggar-boy roaming the wintry streets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With witless hand held out to passers-by;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet God made the voice of its many cries.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mine be the work that comes first to my hand!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lever set, I grasp and heave withal.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I love where I live, and let my labour flow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the hollows of the neighbour-needs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perhaps I like it best: I would not choose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another than the ordered circumstance.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This farm is God's as much as yonder town;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These men and maidens, kine and horses, his;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For them his laws must be incarnated</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In act and fact, and so their world redeemed."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Though thus he spoke at times, he spake not oft;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ruled chief by action: what he said, he did.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No grief was suffered there of man or beast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More than was need; no creature fled in fear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All slaying was with generous suddenness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like God's benignant lightning. "For," he said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"God makes the beasts, and loves them dearly well—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Better than any parent loves his child,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It may be," would he say; for still the <i>may be</i></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was sacred with him no less than the <i>is</i>—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"In such humility he lived and wrought—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hence are they sacred. Sprung from God as we,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They are our brethren in a lower kind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in their face we see the human look."</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If any said: "Men look like animals;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each has his type set in the lower kind;"</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His answer was: "The animals are like men;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each has his true type set in the higher kind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though even there only rough-hewn as yet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hell of cruelty will be the ghosts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the sad beasts: their crowding heads will come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with encircling, slow, pain-patient eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Stare the ill man to madness."</span>
					<span>When he spoke,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His word behind it had the force of deeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unborn within him, ready to be born;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, like his race, he promised very slow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His goodness ever went before his word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Embodying itself unconsciously</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In understanding of the need that prayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cheerful help that would outrun the prayer.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When from great cities came the old sad news</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of crime and wretchedness, and children sore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With hunger, and neglect, and cruel blows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He would walk sadly all the afternoon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With head down-bent, and pondering footstep slow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arriving ever at the same result—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Concluding ever: "The best that I can do</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the great world, is the same best I can</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For this my world. What truth may be therein</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will pass beyond my narrow circumstance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In truth's own right." When a philanthropist</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said pompously: "It is not for your gifts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To spend themselves on common labours thus:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You owe the world far nobler things than such;"</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He answered him: "The world is in God's hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This part of it in mine. My sacred past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all its loves inherited, has led</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hither, here left me: shall I judge, arrogant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Primaeval godlike work in earth and air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seed-time and harvest—offered fellowship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With God in nature—unworthy of my hands?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I know your argument—I know with grief!—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The crowds of men, in whom a starving soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cries through the windows of their hollow eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For bare humanity, nay, room to grow!—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would I could help them! But all crowds are made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of individuals; and their grief and pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their thirst and hunger—all are of the one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not of the many: the true, the saving power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enters the individual door, and thence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Issues again in thousand influences</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Besieging other doors. I cannot throw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mass of good into the general midst,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereof each man may seize his private share;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if one could, it were of lowest kind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not reaching to that hunger of the soul.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now here I labour whole in the same spot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where they have known me from my childhood up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I know them, each individual:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If there is power in me to help my own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even of itself it flows beyond my will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Takes shape in commonest of common acts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meets every humble day's necessity:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—I would not always consciously do good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not always work from full intent of help,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest I forget the measure heaped and pressed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And running over which they pour for me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And never reap the too-much of return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In smiling trust and beams from kindly eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But in the city, with a few lame words,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a few wretched coins, sore-coveted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To mediate 'twixt my <i>cannot</i> and my <i>would</i>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My best attempts would never strike a root;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My scattered corn would turn to wind-blown chaff;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I should grow weak, might weary of my kind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Misunderstood the most where almost known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Baffled and beaten by their unbelief:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Years could not place me where I stand this day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High on the vantage-ground of confidence:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I might for years toil on, and reach no man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Besides, to leave the thing that nearest lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And choose the thing far off, more difficult—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The act, having no touch of God in it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who seeks the needy for the pure need's sake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must straightway die, choked in its selfishness."</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus he. The world-wise schemer for the good</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Held his poor peace, and went his trackless way.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What of the vision now? the vision fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent forth to meet him, when at eve he went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Home from his first day's ploughing? Oft he dreamed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She passed him smiling on her stately horse;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But never band or buckle yielded more;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never again his hands enthroned the maid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He only worshipped with his eyes, and woke.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor woke he then with foolish vain regret;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, saying, "I have seen the beautiful,"</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smiled with his eyes upon a flower or bird,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or living form, whate'er, of gentleness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That met him first; and all that morn, his face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would oftener dawn into a blossomy smile.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And ever when he read a lofty tale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or when the storied leaf, or ballad old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or spake or sang of woman very fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or wondrous good, he saw her face alone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tale was told, the song was sung of her.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He did not turn aside from other maids,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But loved their faces pure and faithful eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He may have thought, "One day I wed a maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And make her mine;" but never came the maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or never came the hour: he walked alone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Meantime how fared the lady? She had wed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One of the common crowd: there must be ore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the gold grains to lie in: virgin gold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lies in the rock, enriching not the stone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She was not one who of herself could <i>be</i>;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she had found no heart which, tuned with hers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would beat in rhythm, growing into rime.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She read phantasmagoric tales, sans salt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sans hope, sans growth; or listlessly conversed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With phantom-visitors—ladies, not friends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mere spectral forms from fashion's concave glass.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She haunted gay assemblies, ill-content—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Witched woods to hide in from her better self,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And danced, and sang, and ached. What had she felt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If, called up by the ordered sounds and motions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A vision had arisen—as once, of old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The minstrel's art laid bare the seer's eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And showed him plenteous waters in the waste;—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If the gay dance had vanished from her sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she beheld her ploughman-lover go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his great stride across a lonely field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under the dark blue vault ablaze with stars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lifting his full eyes to the radiant roof,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Live with our future; or had she beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him studious, with space-compelling mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bent on his slate, pursue some planet's course;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or reading justify the poet's wrath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or sage's slow conclusion?—If a voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had whispered then: This man in many a dream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many a waking moment of keen joy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blesses you for the look that woke his heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That smiled him into life, and, still undimmed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lies lamping in the cabinet of his soul;—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would her sad eyes have beamed with sudden light?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would not her soul, half-dead with nothingness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have risen from the couch of its unrest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And looked to heaven again, again believed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In God and life, courage, and duty, and love?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would not her soul have sung to its lone self:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"I have a friend, a ploughman, who is wise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He knows what God, and goodness, and fair faith</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mean in the words and books of mighty men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He nothing heeds the show of worldly things,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But worships the unconquerable truth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This man is humble and loves me: I will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be proud and very humble. If he knew me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would he go on and love me till we meet!"?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In the third year, a heavy harvest fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full filled, before the reaping-hook and scythe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heat was scorching, but the men and maids</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lightened their toil with merry jest and song;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rested at mid-day, and from brimming bowl,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drank the brown ale, and white abundant milk.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The last ear fell, and spiky stubble stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where waved the forests of dry-murmuring corn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sheaves rose piled in shocks, like ranged tents</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of an encamping army, tent by tent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To stand there while the moon should have her will.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The grain was ripe. The harvest carts went out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broad-platformed, bearing back the towering load,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With frequent passage 'twixt homeyard and field.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And half the oats already hid their tops,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their ringing, rustling, wind-responsive sprays,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the still darkness of the towering stack;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When in the north low billowy clouds appeared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blue-based, white-crested, in the afternoon;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And westward, darker masses, plashed with blue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And outlined vague in misty steep and dell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clomb o'er the hill-tops: thunder was at hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The air was sultry. But the upper sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Was clear and radiant.</span>
					<span>Downward went the sun,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Below the sullen clouds that walled the west,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Below the hills, below the shadowed world.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The moon looked over the clear eastern wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And slanting rose, and looked, rose, looked again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And searched for silence in her yellow fields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But found it not. For there the staggering carts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like overladen beasts, crawled homeward still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sped fieldward light and low. The laugh broke yet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That lightning of the soul's unclouded skies—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though not so frequent, now that toil forgot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its natural hour. Still on the labour went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straining to beat the welkin-climbing heave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the huge rain-clouds, heavy with their floods.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sleep, old enchantress, sided with the clouds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hoisting clouds, and cast benumbing spells</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On man and horse. One youth who walked beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A ponderous load of sheaves, higher than wont,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which dared the lurking levin overhead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Woke with a start, falling against the wheel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That circled slow after the slumbering horse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet none would yield to soft-suggesting sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And quit the last few shocks; for the wild storm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would catch thereby the skirts of Harvest-home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hold her lingering half-way in the rain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The scholar laboured with his men all night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He did not favour such prone headlong race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Nature. To himself he said: "The night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is sent for sleep; we ought to sleep in the night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leave the clouds to God. Not every storm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That climbeth heavenward overwhelms the earth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when God wills, 'tis better he should will;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What he takes from us never can be lost."</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the father so had ordered, and the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went manful to his work, and held his peace.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When the dawn blotted pale the clouded east,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The first drops, overgrown and helpless, fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the last home-bound cart, oppressed with sheaves;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by its side, the last in the retreat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The scholar walked, slow bringing up the rear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half the still lengthening journey he had gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When, on opposing strength of upper winds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tumultuous borne, at last the labouring racks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Met in the zenith, and the silence ceased:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lightning brake, and flooded all the world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its roar of airy billows following it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The darkness drank the lightning, and again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lay more unslaked. But ere the darkness came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the full revelation of the flash,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Met by some stranger flash from cloudy brain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He saw the lady, borne upon her horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Careless of thunder, as when, years agone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He saw her once, to see for evermore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Ah, ha!" he said, "my dreams are come for me!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now shall they have me!" For, all through the night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There had been growing trouble in his frame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An overshadowing of something dire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arrived at home, the weary man and horse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forsook their load; the one went to his stall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The other sought the haven of his bed—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There slept and moaned, cried out, and woke, and slept:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through all the netted labyrinth of his brain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fever shot its pent malignant fire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>'Twas evening when to passing consciousness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He woke and saw his father by his side:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His guardian form in every vision drear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That followed, watching shone; and the healing face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his true sister gleamed through all his pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soothing and strengthening with cloudy hope;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till, at the weary last of many days,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He woke to sweet quiescent consciousness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enfeebled much, but with a new-born life—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His soul a summer evening after rain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Slow, with the passing weeks, he gathered strength,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ere the winter came, seemed half restored;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hope was busy. But a fire too keen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Burned in his larger eyes; and in his cheek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too ready came the blood at faintest call,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glowing a fair, quick-fading, sunset hue.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Before its hour, a biting frost set in.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It gnawed with icy fangs his shrinking life;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that disease bemoaned throughout the land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The smiling, hoping, wasting, radiant death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was born of outer cold and inner heat.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>One morn his sister, entering while he slept,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spied in his listless hand a handkerchief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spotted with red. Cold with dismay, she stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scared, motionless. But catching in the glass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sudden glimpse of a white ghostly face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She started at herself, and he awoke.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He understood, and said with smile unsure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Bright red was evermore my master-hue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And see, I have it in me: that is why."</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She shuddered; and he saw, nor jested more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But smiled again, and looked Death in the face.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When first he saw the red blood outward leap,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if it sought again the fountain-heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whence it had flowed to fill the golden bowl,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No terror seized—an exaltation swelled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His spirit: now the pondered mystery</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would fling its portals wide, and take him in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One of the awful dead! Them, fools conceive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As ghosts that fleet and pine, bereft of weight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And half their valued lives: he otherwise;—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hoped now, and now expected; and, again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said only, "I await the thing to come."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So waits a child the lingering curtain's rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While yet the panting lamps restrained burn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At half-height, and the theatre is full.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But as the days went by, they brought sad hours,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he would sit, his hands upon his knees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drooping, and longing for the wine of life.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For when the ninefold crystal spheres, through which</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The outer light sinks in, are cracked and broken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet able to keep in the 'piring life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Distressing shadows cross the chequered soul:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poor Psyche trims her irresponsive lamp,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And anxious visits oft her store of oil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And still the shadows fall: she must go pray!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And God, who speaks to man at door and lattice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glorious in stars, and winds, and flowers, and waves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not seldom shuts the door and dims the pane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, isled in calm, his still small voice may sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The clearer, by the hearth, in the inner room—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sound on until the soul, fulfilled of hope,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look undismayed on that which cannot kill;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And saying in the dark, <i>I will the light</i>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glow in the gloom the present will of God:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then melt the shadows of her shaken house.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He, when his lamp shot up a spiring flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would thus break forth and climb the heaven of prayer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Do with us what thou wilt, all-glorious heart!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou God of them that are not yet, but grow!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We trust thee for the thing we shall be yet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We too are ill content with what we are."</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when the flame sank, and the darkness fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He lived by faith which is the soul of sight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet in the frequent pauses of the light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When all was dreary as a drizzling thaw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When sleep came not although he prayed for sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wakeful-weary on his bed he lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like frozen lake that has no heaven within;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, then the sleeping horror woke and stirred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with the tooth of unsure thought began</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To gnaw the roots of life:—What if there were</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No truth in beauty! What if loveliness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were but the invention of a happier mood!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"For, if my mind can dim or slay the Fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why should it not enhance or make the Fair?"</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Nay," Psyche answered; "for a tired man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May drop his eyelids on the visible world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To whom no dreams, when fancy flieth free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will bring the sunny excellence of day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>'Tis easy to destroy; God only makes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could my invention sweep the lucid waves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With purple shadows—next create the joy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With which my life beholds them? Wherefore should</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One meet the other without thought of mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If God did not mean beauty in them and me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But dropped them, helpless shadows, from his sun?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There were no God, his image not being mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I should seek in vain for any bliss!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh, lack and doubt and fear can only come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because of plenty, confidence, and love!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those are the shadow-forms about the feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of these—because they are not crystal-clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the all-searching sun in which they live:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dread of its loss is Beauty's certain seal!"</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus reasoned mourning Psyche. Suddenly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sun would rise, and vanish Psyche's lamp,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Absorbed in light, not swallowed in the dark.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It was a wintry time with sunny days,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With visitings of April airs and scents,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That came with sudden presence, unforetold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As brushed from off the outer spheres of spring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the great world where all is old and new.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strange longings he had never known till now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Awoke within him, flowers of rooted hope.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a whole silent hour he would sit and gaze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the distant hills, whose dazzling snow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Starred the dim blue, or down their dark ravines</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crept vaporous; until the fancy rose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That on the other side those rampart walls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mighty woman sat, with waiting face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Calm as that life whose rapt intensity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Borders on death, silent, waiting for him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make him grand for ever with a kiss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And send him silent through the toning worlds.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The father saw him waning. The proud sire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beheld his pride go drooping in the cold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like snowdrop on its grave; and sighed deep thanks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he was old. But evermore the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looked up and smiled as he had heard strange news</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across the waste, of tree-buds and primroses.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then all at once the other mood would come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, like a troubled child, he would seek his father</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For father-comfort, which fathers all can give:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sure there is one great Father in the world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since every word of good from fathers' lips</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Falleth with such authority, although</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They are but men as we! This trembling son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who saw the unknown death draw hourly nigher,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sought solace in his father's tenderness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And made him strong to die.</span>
					<span>One shining day,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shining with sun and snow, he came and said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"What think you, father—is death very sore?"</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"My boy," the father answered, "we will try</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make it easy with the present God.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, as I judge, though more by hope than sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It seems much harder to the lookers on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than to the man who dies. Each panting breath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We call a gasp, may be in him the cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of infant eagerness; or, at worst, the sob</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With which the unclothed spirit, step by step.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wades forth into the cool eternal sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I think, my boy, death has two sides to it—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One sunny, and one dark—as this round earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is every day half sunny and half dark.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We on the dark side call the mystery <i>death</i>;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They on the other, looking down in light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wait the glad <i>birth</i>, with other tears than ours."</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Be near me, father, when I die," he said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"I will, my boy, until a better Father</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Draws your hand out of mine. Be near in turn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When my time comes—you in the light beyond,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And knowing well the country—I in the dark."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The days went by, until the tender green</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shone through the snow in patches. Then the hope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of life, reviving faintly, stirred his heart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the spring drew him—warm, soft, budding spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With promises, and he went forth to meet her.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But he who once had strode a king on the fields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Walked softly now; lay on the daisied grass;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sighed sometimes in secret, that so soon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The earth, with all its suns and harvests fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must lie far off, an old forsaken thing.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But though I lingering listen to the old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere yet I strike new chords that seize the old</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lift their lost souls up the music-stair—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Think not he was too fearful-faint of heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To look the blank unknown full in the void;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he had hope in God—the growth of years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of ponderings, of childish aspirations,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of prayers and readings and repentances;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For something in him had ever sought the peace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of other something deeper in him still—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A <i>faint</i> sound sighing for a harmony</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With other fainter sounds, that softly drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nearer and nearer from the unknown depths</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the Individual goeth out in God:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The something in him heard, and, hearing, listened,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sought the way by which the music came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hoping at last to find the face of him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To whom Saint John said <i>Lord</i> with holy awe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on his bosom fearless leaned the while.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As his slow spring came on, the swelling life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The new creation inside of the old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pressed up in buds toward the invisible.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And burst the crumbling mould wherein it lay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not once he thought of that still churchyard now;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He looked away from earth, and loved the sky.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One earthly notion only clung to him:—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He thanked God that he died not in the cold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"For," said he, "I would rather go abroad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the sun shines, and birds are singing blithe.—It</span>
				<br/>
				<span>may be that we know not aught of place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or any sense, and only live in thought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, knowing not, I cling to warmth and light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I <i>may</i> pass forth into the sea of air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That swings its massy waves around the earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I would rather go when it is full</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of light, and blue, and larks, than when gray fog</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dulls it with steams of old earth winter-sick.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now in the dawn of summer I shall die—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sinking asleep ere sunset, I will hope,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And going with the light. And when they say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>'He's dead; he rests at last; his face is changed;'</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall be saying: Yet, yet, I live, I love!'"</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The weary nights did much to humble him;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They made the good he knew seem all ill known:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He would go by and by to school again!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Father," he said, "I am nothing; but Thou <i>art</i>!"</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like half-asleep, whole-dreaming child, he was,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, longing for his mother, has forgot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The arms about him, holding him to her heart:</span>
				<br/>
				<span><i>Mother</i> he murmuring moans; she wakes him up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he may see her face, and sleep indeed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Father! we need thy winter as thy spring;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We need thy earthquakes as thy summer showers;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But through them all thy strong arms carry us,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy strong heart bearing large share in our grief.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because thou lovest goodness more than joy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In them thou lovest, thou dost let them grieve:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We must not vex thee with our peevish cries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But look into thy face, and hold thee fast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And say <i>O Father, Father</i>! when the pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seems overstrong. Remember our poor hearts:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We never grasp the zenith of the time!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We have no spring except in winter-prayers!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But we believe—alas, we only hope!—That</span>
				<br/>
				<span>one day we shall thank thee perfectly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For every disappointment, pang, and shame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That drove us to the bosom of thy love.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>One night, as oft, he lay and could not sleep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His spirit was a chamber, empty, dark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through which bright pictures passed of the outer world:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The regnant Will gazed passive on the show;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The magic tube through which the shadows came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Witch Memory turned and stayed. In ones and troops,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glided across the field the things that were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silent and sorrowful, like all things old:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even old rose-leaves have a mournful scent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And old brown letters are more sad than graves.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>At length, as ever in such vision-hours,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came the bright maiden, high upon her horse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will started all awake, passive no more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, necromantic sage, the apparition</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That came unbid, commanded to abide.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Gathered around her form his brooding thoughts:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How had she fared, spinning her history</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into a psyche-cradle? With what wings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would she come forth to greet the aeonian summer?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glistening with feathery dust of silver? or</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dull red, and seared with spots of black ingrained?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"I know," he said, "some women fail of life!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rose hath shed her leaves: is she a rose?"</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The fount of possibilities began</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To gurgle, threatful, underneath the thought:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Anon the geyser-column raging rose;—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For purest souls sometimes have direst fears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In ghost-hours when the shadow of the earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is cast on half her children, and the sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is busy giving daylight to the rest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>"Oh, God!" he cried, "if she be such as those!—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Angels in the eyes of poet-boys, who still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fancy the wavings of invisible wings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, in their own familiar, chamber-thoughts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Common as clay, and of the trodden earth!—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It cannot, cannot be! She is of God!—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet things lovely perish! higher life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gives deeper death! fair gifts make fouler faults!—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Women themselves—I dare not think the rest!"</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such thoughts went walking up and down his soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But found at last a spot wherein to rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Building a resolution for the day.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The next day, and the next, he was too worn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To clothe intent in body of a deed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cold dry wind blew from the unkindly east,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Making him feel as he had come to the earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before God's spirit moved on the water's face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>To make it ready for him.</span>
					<span>But the third</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Morning rose radiant. A genial wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rippled the blue air 'neath the golden sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And brought glad summer-tidings from the south.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He lay now in his father's room; for there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The southern sun poured all the warmth he had.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His rays fell on the fire, alive with flames,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And turned it ghostly pale, and would have slain—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even as the sunshine of the higher life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quenching the glow of this, leaves but a coal.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He rose and sat him down 'twixt sun and fire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two lives fought in him for the mastery;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And half from each forth flowed the written stream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Lady, I owe thee much. Stay not to look</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon my name: I write it, but I date</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the churchyard, where it shall lie in peace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou reading it. Thou know'st me not at all;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor dared I write, but death is crowning me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy equal. If my boldness yet offend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lo, pure in my intent, I am with the ghosts;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where when thou comest, thou hast already known</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God equal makes at first, and Death at last."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>"But pardon, lady. Ere I had begun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My thoughts moved toward thee with a gentle flow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That bore a depth of waters: when I took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My pen to write, they rushed into a gulf,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Precipitate and foamy. Can it be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Death who humbles all hath made me proud?"</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>"Lady, thy loveliness hath walked my brain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if I were thy heritage bequeathed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From many sires; yet only from afar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have worshipped thee—content to know the vision</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had lifted me above myself who saw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ta'en my angel nigh thee in thy heaven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy beauty, lady, hath overflowed, and made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another being beautiful, beside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With virtue to aspire and be itself.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Afar as angels or the sainted dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet near as loveliness can haunt a man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy form hath put on each revealing dress</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of circumstance and history, high or low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In which, from any tale of selfless life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Essential womanhood hath shone on me."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>"Ten years have passed away since the first time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which was the last, I saw thee. What have these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made or unmade in thee?—I ask myself.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O lovely in my memory! art thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As lovely in thyself? Thy glory then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was what God made thee: art thou such indeed?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forgive my boldness, lady—I am dead:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dead may cry, their voices are so small."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>"I have a prayer to make thee—hear the dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lady, for God's sake be as beautiful</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As that white form that dwelleth in my heart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, better still, as that ideal Pure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That waketh in thee, when thou prayest God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or helpest thy poor neighbour. For myself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I pray. For if I die and find that she,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My woman-glory, lives in common air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is not so very radiant after all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My sad face will afflict the calm-eyed ghosts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unused to see such rooted sorrow there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With palm to palm my kneeling ghost implores</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thee, living lady—justify my faith</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In womanhood's white-handed nobleness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thee, its revelation unto me."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>"But I bethink me:—If thou turn thy thoughts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon thyself, even for that great sake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of purity and conscious whiteness' self,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou wilt but half succeed. The other half</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is to forget the former, yea, thyself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quenching thy moonlight in the blaze of day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turning thy being full unto thy God.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be thou in him a pure, twice holy child,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doing the right with sweet unconsciousness—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Having God in thee, thy completing soul."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>"Lady, I die; the Father holds me up.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is not much to thee that I should die;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It may be much to know he holds me up."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>"I thank thee, lady, for the gentle look</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which crowned me from thine eyes ten years ago,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere, clothed in nimbus of the setting sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thee from my dazzled eyes thy horse did bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proud of his burden. My dull tongue was mute—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I was a fool before thee; but my silence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was the sole homage possible to me then:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That now I speak, and fear not, is thy gift.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The same sweet look be possible to thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For evermore! I bless thee with thine own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And say farewell, and go into my grave—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No, to the sapphire heaven of all my hopes."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Followed his name in full, and then the name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the green churchyard where his form should lie.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Back to his couch he crept, weary, and said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"O God, I am but an attempt at life!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sleep falls again ere I am full awake.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Light goeth from me in the morning hour.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have seen nothing clearly; felt no thrill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of pure emotion, save in dreams, ah—dreams!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The high Truth has but flickered in my soul—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even at such times, in wide blue midnight hours,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When, dawning sudden on my inner world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New stars came forth, revealing unknown depths,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New heights of silence, quelling all my sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And for a moment I saw formless fact,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And knew myself a living lonely thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Isled in the hyaline of Truth alway!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have not reaped earth's harvest, O my God;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have gathered but a few poor wayside flowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Harebells, red poppies, daisies, eyebrights blue—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gathered them by the way, for comforting!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have I aimed proudly, therefore aimed too low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Striving for something visible in my thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And not the unseen thing hid far in thine?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make me content to be a primrose-flower</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among thy nations, so the fair truth, hid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the sweet primrose, come awake in me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I rejoice, an individual soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reflecting thee—as truly then divine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if I towered the angel of the sun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once, in a southern eve, a glowing worm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave me a keener joy than the heaven of stars:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou camest in the worm nearer me then!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor do I think, were I that green delight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I would change to be the shadowy evening star.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah, make me, Father, anything thou wilt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So be thou will it! I am safe with thee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I laugh exulting. Make me something, God—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clear, sunny, veritable purity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of mere existence, in thyself content.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seeking no compare. Sure I <i>have</i> reaped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earth's harvest if I find this holy death!—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now I am ready; take me when thou wilt."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He laid the letter in his desk, with seal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And superscription. When his sister came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He told her where to find it—afterwards.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As the slow eve, through paler, darker shades,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Insensibly declines, until at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lordly day is but a memory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So died he. In the hush of noon he died.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sun shone on—why should he not shine on?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glad summer noises rose from all the land;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The love of God lay warm on hill and plain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>'Tis well to die in summer.</span>
					<span>When the breath,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After a hopeless pause, returned no more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The father fell upon his knees, and said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"O God, I thank thee; it is over now!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the sore time thy hand has led him well.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lord, let me follow soon, and be at rest."</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therewith he rose, and comforted the maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who in her brother had lost the pride of life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wept as all her heaven were only rain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Of the loved lady, little more I know.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I know not if, when she had read his words,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She rose in haste, and to her chamber went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shut the door; nor if, when she came forth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A dawn of holier purpose gleamed across</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sadness of her brow. But this I know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, on a warm autumnal afternoon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When headstone-shadows crossed three neighbour graves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, like an ended prayer, the empty church</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood in the sunshine, or a cenotaph,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A little boy, who watched a cow near by</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gather her milk where alms of clover-fields</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lay scattered on the sides of silent roads,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All sudden saw, nor knew whence she had come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A lady, veiled, alone, and very still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seated upon a grave. Long time she sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And moved not, weeping sore, the watcher said—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though how he knew she wept, were hard to tell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At length, slow-leaning on her elbow down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She hid her face a while in the short grass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pulled a something small from off the mound—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A blade of grass it must have been, he thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For nothing else was there, not even a daisy—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And put it in a letter. Then she rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And glided silent forth, over the wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the two steps on this side and on that</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shorten the path from westward to the church.—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The clang of hoofs and sound of light, swift wheels</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arose and died upon the listener's ear.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-homeless-ghost" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Homeless Ghost</h2>
<p>Through still, bare streets, and cold moonshine<br/>

  His homeward way he bent;<br/>

The clocks gave out the midnight sign<br/>

  As lost in thought he went<br/>

Along the rampart's ocean-line,<br/>

Where, high above the tossing brine,<br/>

  Seaward his lattice leant.<br/>
</p>

<p>He knew not why he left the throng,<br/>

  Why there he could not rest,<br/>

What something pained him in the song<br/>

  And mocked him in the jest,<br/>

Or why, the flitting crowd among,<br/>

A moveless moonbeam lay so long<br/>

  Athwart one lady's breast!<br/>
</p>

<p>He watched, but saw her speak to none,<br/>

  Saw no one speak to her;<br/>

Like one decried, she stood alone,<br/>

  From the window did not stir;<br/>

Her hair by a haunting gust was blown,<br/>

Her eyes in the shadow strangely shown,<br/>

  She looked a wanderer.<br/>
</p>

<p>He reached his room, he sought a book<br/>

  His brooding to beguile;<br/>

But ever he saw her pallid look,<br/>

  Her face too still to smile.<br/>

An hour he sat in his fireside nook,<br/>

The time flowed past like a silent brook,<br/>

  Not a word he read the while.<br/>
</p>

<p>Vague thoughts absorbed his passive brain<br/>

  Of love that bleeding lies,<br/>

Of hoping ever and hoping in vain,<br/>

  Of a sorrow that never dies—<br/>

When a sudden spatter of angry rain<br/>

Smote against every window-pane,<br/>

  And he heard far sea-birds' cries.<br/>
</p>

<p>He looked from the lattice: the misty moon<br/>

  Hardly a glimmer gave;<br/>

The wind was like one that hums a tune,<br/>

  The first low gathering stave;<br/>

The ocean lay in a sullen swoon,<br/>

With a moveless, monotonous, murmured croon<br/>

  Like the moaning of a slave.<br/>
</p>

<p>Sudden, with masterful, angry blare<br/>

  It howled from the watery west:<br/>

The storm was up, he had left his lair!<br/>

  The night would be no jest!<br/>

He turned: a lady sat in his chair!<br/>

Through her loose dim robe her arm came bare,<br/>

  And it lay across her breast.<br/>
</p>

<p>She sat a white queen on a ruined throne,<br/>

  A lily bowed with blight;<br/>

In her eyes the darkness about was blown<br/>

  By flashes of liquid light;<br/>

Her skin with very whiteness shone;<br/>

Back from her forehead loosely thrown<br/>

  Her hair was dusk as night.<br/>
</p>

<p>Wet, wet it hung, and wept like weeds<br/>

  Down her pearly shoulders bare;<br/>

The pale drops glistened like diamond beads<br/>

  Caught in a silken snare;<br/>

As the silver-filmy husk to its seeds<br/>

Her dank robe clings, and but half recedes<br/>

  Her form so shadowy fair.<br/>
</p>

<p>Doubting she gazed in his wondering face,<br/>

  Wonder his utterance ties;<br/>

She searches, like one in forgetful case,<br/>

  For something within his eyes,<br/>

For something that love holds ever in chase,<br/>

For something that is, and has no place,<br/>

  But away in the thinking lies.<br/>
</p>

<p>Speechless he ran, brought a wrap of wool,<br/>

  And a fur that with down might vie;<br/>

Listless, into the gathering pool<br/>

  She dropped them, and let them lie.<br/>

He piled the hearth with fagots so full<br/>

That the flames, as if from the log of Yule,<br/>

  Up the chimney went roaring high.<br/>
</p>

<p>Then she spoke, and lovely to heart and ear<br/>

  Was her voice, though broke by pain;<br/>

Afar it sounded, though sweet and clear,<br/>

  As if from out of the rain;<br/>

As if from out of the night-wind drear<br/>

It came like the voice of one in fear<br/>

  Lest she should no welcome gain.<br/>
</p>

<p>"I am too far off to feel the cold,<br/>

  Too cold to feel the fire;<br/>

It cannot get through the heap of mould<br/>

  That soaks in the drip from the spire:<br/>

Cerement of wax 'neath cloth of gold,<br/>

'Neath fur and wool in fold on fold,<br/>

  Freezes in frost so dire."<br/>
</p>

<p>Her voice and her eyes and her cheek so white<br/>

  Thrilled him through heart and brain;<br/>

Wonder and pity and love unite<br/>

  In a passion of bodiless pain;<br/>

Her beauty possessed him with strange delight:<br/>

He was out with her in the live wan night,<br/>

  With her in the blowing rain!<br/>
</p>

<p>Sudden she rose, she kneeled, she flung<br/>

  Her loveliness at his feet:<br/>

"I am tired of being blown and swung<br/>

  In the rain and the snow and the sleet!<br/>

But better no rest than stillness among<br/>

Things whose names would defile my tongue!<br/>

  How I hate the mouldy sheet!<br/>
</p>

<p>"Ah, though a ghost, I'm a lady still!"<br/>

  The youth recoiled aghast.<br/>

Her eyes grew wide and pale and chill<br/>

  With a terror that surpassed.<br/>

He caught her hand: a freezing thrill<br/>

Stung to his wrist, but with steadfast will<br/>

  He held it warm and fast.<br/>
</p>

<p>"What can I do to save thee, dear?"<br/>

  At the word she sprang upright;<br/>

On tiptoe she stood, he bent his ear,<br/>

  She whispered, whispered light.<br/>

She withdrew; she gazed with an asking fear:<br/>

Like one that looks on his lady's bier<br/>

  He stood, with a face ghost-white.<br/>
</p>

<p>"Six times—in vain, oh hapless maid!—<br/>

  I have humbled myself to sue!<br/>

This is the last: as the sunset decayed,<br/>

  Out with the twilight I grew,<br/>

And about the city flitted and strayed,<br/>

A wandering, lonely, forsaken shade:<br/>

  No one saw me but you."<br/>
</p>

<p>He shivered, he shook, he had turned to clay,<br/>

  Vile fear had gone into his blood;<br/>

His face was a dismal ashy gray,<br/>

  Through his heart crept slime and mud;<br/>

The lady stood in a still dismay,<br/>

She drooped, she shrank, she withered away<br/>

  Like a half-blown frozen bud.<br/>
</p>

<p>"Speak once more. Am I frightful then?<br/>

  I live, though they call it death;<br/>

I am only cold! Say <i>dear</i> again."<br/>

  But scarce could he heave a breath;<br/>

Over a dank and steaming fen<br/>

He floated astray from the world of men,<br/>

  A lost, half-conscious wraith.<br/>
</p>

<p>"Ah, 'tis the last time! Save me!" Her cry<br/>

  Entered his heart, and lay.<br/>

But he loved the sunshine, the golden sky,<br/>

  And the ghosts' moonlight is gray!—<br/>

As feverous visions flit and fly<br/>

And without a motion elude the eye,<br/>

  She stood three steps away.<br/>
</p>

<p>But oh, her eyes!—refusal base<br/>

  Those live-soul-stars had slain!<br/>

Frozen eyes in an icy face<br/>

  They had grown. Like a ghost of the brain,<br/>

Beside the lattice, thought-moved in space,<br/>

She stood with a doleful despairing grace:<br/>

  The fire burned! clanged the rain!<br/>
</p>

<p>Faded or fled, she had vanished quite!<br/>

  The loud wind sank to a sigh;<br/>

Pale faces without paled the face of night,<br/>

  Sweeping the window by;<br/>

Some to the glass pressed a cheek of fright,<br/>

Some shot a gleam of decaying light<br/>

  From a flickering, uncertain eye.<br/>
</p>

<p>Whence did it come, from the sky or the deep,<br/>

  That faint, long-cadenced wail?<br/>

From the closing door of the down-way steep,<br/>

  His own bosom, or out of the gale?<br/>

From the land where dead dreams, or dead maidens sleep?<br/>

Out of every night to come will creep<br/>

  That cry his heart to quail!<br/>
</p>

<p>The clouds had broken, the wind was at rest,<br/>

  The sea would be still ere morn,<br/>

The moon had gone down behind its breast<br/>

  Save the tip of one blunt horn:<br/>

Was that the ghost-angel without a nest—<br/>

Across the moonset far in the west<br/>

 That thin white vapour borne?<br/>
</p>

<p>He turned from the lattice: the fire-lit room<br/>

  With its ghost-forsaken chair<br/>

Was cold and drear as a rifled tomb,<br/>

  Shameful and dreamless and bare!<br/>

Filled it was with his own soul's gloom,<br/>

With the sense of a traitor's merited doom,<br/>

  With a lovely ghost's despair!<br/>
</p>

<p>He had driven a lady, and lightly clad,<br/>

  Out in the stormy cold!<br/>

Was she a ghost?—Divinely sad<br/>

  Are the people of Hades old!<br/>

A wandering ghost? Oh, self-care bad,<br/>

Caitiff and craven and cowering, which had<br/>

  Refused her an earthly fold!<br/>
</p>

<p>Ill had she fared, his lovely guest!—<br/>

  A passion of wild self-blame<br/>

Tore the heart that failed in the test<br/>

  With a thousand hooks of shame,<br/>

Bent his proud head on his heaving breast,<br/>

Shore the plume from his ancient crest,<br/>

  Puffed at his ancient name.<br/>
</p>

<p>He sickened with scorn of a fallen will,<br/>

  With love and remorse he wept;<br/>

He sank and kissed her footprints chill<br/>

  And the track by her garment swept;<br/>

He kneeled by her chair, all ice-cold still,<br/>

Dropped his head in it, moaned until<br/>

  For weariness he slept.<br/>
</p>

<p>He slept until the flaming sun<br/>

  Laughed at the by-gone dark:<br/>

"A frightful dream!—but the night is done,"<br/>

  He said, "and I hear the lark!"<br/>

All day he held out; with the evening gun<br/>

A booming terror his brain did stun,<br/>

  And Doubt, the jackal, gan bark.<br/>
</p>

<p>Followed the lion, Conviction, fast,<br/>

  And the truth no dream he knew!<br/>

Night after night raved the conscience-blast,<br/>

  But stilled as the morning grew.<br/>

When seven slow moons had come and passed<br/>

His self-reproach aside he cast,<br/>

  And the truth appeared untrue.<br/>
</p>

<p>A lady fair—old story vile!—<br/>

  Would make his heart her boast:<br/>

In the growing glamour of her smile<br/>

  He forgot the lovely ghost:<br/>

Forgot her for bitterness wrapt in wile,<br/>

For the lady was false as a crocodile,<br/>

  And her heart was a cave of frost.<br/>
</p>

<p>Then the cold white face, with its woe divine,<br/>

  Came back in the hour of sighs:<br/>

Not always with comfort to those that pine<br/>

  The dear true faces arise!<br/>

He yearned for her, dreamed of her, prayed for a sign;<br/>

He wept for her pleading voice, and the shine<br/>

  Of her solitary eyes.<br/>
</p>

<p>"With thy face so still, which I made so sad—<br/>

  Ah me! which I might have wooed—<br/>

Thou holdest my heart in a love not glad,<br/>

  Sorrowful, shame-subdued!<br/>

Come to me, lady, in pardon clad;<br/>

Come to my dreams, white Aidead,<br/>

  For on thee all day I brood!"<br/>
</p>

<p>She came not. He sought her in churchyards old,<br/>

  In churchyards by the sea;<br/>

And in many a church, when the midnight tolled<br/>

  And the moon shone eerily,<br/>

Down to the crypt he crept, grown bold,<br/>

Sat all night in the dead men's cold,<br/>

  And called to her: never came she.<br/>
</p>

<p>Praying forgiveness more and more,<br/>

  And her love at any cost,<br/>

Pining and sighing and longing sore<br/>

  He grew like a creature lost;<br/>

Thin and spectral his body wore,<br/>

He faded out at the ghostly door,<br/>

  And was himself a ghost.<br/>
</p>

<p>But if he found the lady then,<br/>

  So sorrowfully lost<br/>

For lack of the love 'mong earthly men<br/>

  That was ready to brave love's cost,<br/>

I know not till I drop my pen,<br/>

Wander away from earthly ken,<br/>

  And am myself a ghost.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="abu-midjan" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Abu Midjan</h2>
<p>"If I sit in the dust<br/>

  For lauding good wine,<br/>

Ha, ha! it is just:<br/>

  So sits the vine!"<br/>
</p>

<p>Abu Midjan sang as he sat in chains,<br/>

For the blood of the grape ran the juice of his veins.<br/>

The Prophet had said, "O Faithful, drink not!"<br/>

Abu Midjan drank till his heart was hot;<br/>

Yea, he sang a song in praise of wine,<br/>

He called it good names—a joy divine,<br/>

The giver of might, the opener of eyes,<br/>

Love's handmaid, the water of Paradise!<br/>

Therefore Saad his chief spake words of blame,<br/>

And set him in irons—a fettered flame;<br/>

But he sings of the wine as he sits in his chains,<br/>

For the blood of the grape runs the juice of his veins:<br/>
</p>

<p>"I will not think<br/>

  That the Prophet said<br/>

<i>Ye shall not drink<br/>

  Of the flowing red!</i>"<br/>
</p>

<p>"'Tis a drenched brain<br/>

  Whose after-sting<br/>

Cries out, <i>Refrain:<br/>

  'Tis an evil thing!</i><br/>
</p>

<p>"But I will dare,<br/>

  With a goodly drought,<br/>

To drink, nor spare<br/>

  Till my thirst be out.<br/>
</p>

<p>"<i>I</i> do not laugh<br/>

  Like a Christian fool<br/>

But in silence quaff<br/>

  The liquor cool<br/>
</p>

<p>"At door of tent<br/>

  'Neath evening star,<br/>

With daylight spent,<br/>

  And Uriel afar!<br/>
</p>

<p>"Then, through the sky,<br/>

  Lo, the emerald hills!<br/>

My faith swells high,<br/>

  My bosom thrills:<br/>
</p>

<p>"I see them hearken,<br/>

  The Houris that wait!<br/>

Their dark eyes darken<br/>

  The diamond gate!<br/>
</p>

<p>"I hear the float<br/>

  Of their chant divine,<br/>

And my heart like a boat<br/>

  Sails thither on wine!<br/>
</p>

<p>"Can an evil thing<br/>

  Make beauty more?<br/>

Or a sinner bring<br/>

  To the heavenly door?<br/>
</p>

<p>"The sun-rain fine<br/>

  Would sink and escape,<br/>

But is drunk by the vine,<br/>

  Is stored in the grape:<br/>
</p>

<p>"And the prisoned light<br/>

  I free again:<br/>

It flows in might<br/>

  Through my shining brain<br/>
</p>

<p>"I love and I know;<br/>

  The truth is mine;<br/>

I walk in the glow<br/>

  Of the sun-bred wine.<br/>
</p>

<p>"<i>I</i> will not think<br/>

  That the Prophet said<br/>

<i>Ye shall not drink<br/>

  Of the flowing red!</i><br/>
</p>

<p>"For his promises, lo,<br/>

  Sevenfold they shine<br/>

When the channels o'erflow<br/>

  With the singing wine!<br/>
</p>

<p>"But I care not, I!—'tis a small annoy<br/>

To sit in chains for a heavenly joy!"<br/>
</p>

<p>  Away went the song on the light wind borne;<br/>

His head sank down, and a ripple of scorn<br/>

Shook the hair that flowed from his curling lip<br/>

As he eyed his brown limbs in the iron's grip.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Sudden his forehead he lifted high:<br/>

A faint sound strayed like a moth-wing by!<br/>

Like beacons his eyes burst blazing forth:<br/>

A dust-cloud he spied in the distant north!<br/>

A noise and a smoke on the plain afar?<br/>

'Tis the cloud and the clang of the Moslem war!<br/>

He leapt aloft like a tiger snared;<br/>

The wine in his veins through his visage flared;<br/>

He tore at his fetters in bootless ire,<br/>

He called the Prophet, he named his sire;<br/>

From his lips, with wild shout, the Techir burst;<br/>

He danced in his irons; the Giaours he cursed;<br/>

And his eyes they flamed like a beacon dun,<br/>

Or like wine in the crystal twixt eye and sun.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The lady of Saad heard him shout,<br/>

Heard his fetters ring on the stones about<br/>

The heart of a warrior she understood,<br/>

And the rage of the thwarted battle-mood:<br/>

Her name, with the cry of an angry prayer,<br/>

He called but once, and the lady was there.<br/>
</p>

<p>  "The Giaour!" he panted, "the Godless brute!<br/>

And me like a camel tied foot to foot!<br/>

Let me go, and I swear by Allah's fear<br/>

At sunset I don again this gear,<br/>

Or lie in a heaven of starry eyes,<br/>

Kissed by moon-maidens of Paradise!<br/>

O lady, grant me the death of the just!<br/>

Hark to the hurtle! see the dust!"<br/>
</p>

<p>  With ready fingers the noble dame<br/>

Unlocked her husband's iron blame;<br/>

Brought his second horse, his Abdon, out,<br/>

And his second hauberk, light and stout;<br/>

Harnessed the warrior, and hight him go<br/>

An angel of vengeance upon the foe.<br/>
</p>

<p>  With clank of steel and thud of hoof<br/>

Away he galloped; she climbed the roof.<br/>
</p>

<p>  She sees the cloud and the flashes that leap<br/>

From the scythe-shaped swords inside it that sweep<br/>

Down with back-stroke the disordered swath:<br/>

Thither he speeds, a bolt of wrath!<br/>

Straight as an arrow she sees him go,<br/>

Abu Midjan, the singer, upon the foe!<br/>

Like an eagle he vanishes in the cloud,<br/>

And the thunder of battle bursts more loud,<br/>

Mingled of crashes and blows and falls,<br/>

Of the whish that severs the throat that calls,<br/>

Of neighing and shouting and groaning grim:<br/>

Abu Midjan, she sees no more of him!<br/>

Northward the battle drifts afar<br/>

On the flowing tide of the holy war.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Lonely across the desert sand,<br/>

From his wrist by its thong hung his clotted brand,<br/>

Red in the sunset's level flame<br/>

Back to his bonds Abu Midjan came.<br/>
</p>

<p>  "Lady, I swear your Saad's horse—<br/>

The Prophet himself might have rode a worse!<br/>

Like the knots of a serpent the play of his flesh<br/>

As he tore to the quarry in Allah's mesh!<br/>

I forgot him, and mowed at the traitor weeds,<br/>

Which fell before me like rushes and reeds,<br/>

Or like the tall poppies that sudden drop low<br/>

Their heads to an urchin's unstrung bow!<br/>

Fled the Giaour; the faithful flew after to kill;<br/>

I turned to surrender: beneath me still<br/>

Was Abdon unjaded, fresh in force,<br/>

Faithful and fearless—a heavenly horse!<br/>

Give him water, lady, and barley to eat;<br/>

Then haste thee and fetter the wine-bibber's feet."<br/>
</p>

<p>  To the terrace he went, and she to the stall;<br/>

She tended the horse like guest in hall,<br/>

Then to the warrior unhasting returned.<br/>

The fire of the fight in his eyes yet burned,<br/>

But he sat in a silence that might betoken<br/>

One ashamed that his heart had spoken—<br/>

Though where was the word to breed remorse?<br/>

He had lauded only his chief's brave horse!<br/>

Not a word she spoke, but his fetters locked;<br/>

He watched with a smile that himself bemocked;<br/>

She left him seated in caitiff-plight,<br/>

Like one that had feared and fled the fight.<br/>
</p>

<p>  But what singer ever sat lonely long<br/>

Ere the hidden fountain burst in song!<br/>

The battle wine foamed in the warrior's veins,<br/>

And he sang sword-tempest who sat in chains.<br/>
</p>

<p>  "Oh, the wine<br/>

Of the vine<br/>

  Is a feeble thing!<br/>

In the rattle<br/>

Of battle<br/>

  The true grapes spring!<br/>
</p>

<p>"When on whir<br/>

Of Tecbir<br/>

  Allah's wrath flies,<br/>

And the power<br/>

Of the Giaour<br/>

  A blasted leaf lies!<br/>
</p>

<p>"When on force<br/>

Of the horse<br/>

  The arm flung abroad<br/>

Is sweeping,<br/>

And reaping<br/>

  The harvest of God!<br/>
</p>

<p>"Ha! they drop<br/>

From the top<br/>

  To the sear heap below!<br/>

Ha! deeper,<br/>

Down steeper,<br/>

 The infidels go!<br/>
</p>

<p>"Azrael<br/>

Sheer to hell<br/>

 Shoots the foul shoals!<br/>

There Monker<br/>

And Nakir<br/>

  Torture their souls!<br/>
</p>

<p>"But when drop<br/>

On their crop<br/>

  The scimitars red,<br/>

And under<br/>

War's thunder<br/>

  The faithful lie dead,<br/>
</p>

<p>"Oh, bright<br/>

Is the light<br/>

  On hero slow breaking!<br/>

Rapturous faces<br/>

Bent for embraces<br/>

  Watch for his waking!<br/>
</p>

<p>"And he hears<br/>

In his ears<br/>

  The voice of Life's river,<br/>

Like a song<br/>

Of the strong,<br/>

  Jubilant ever!<br/>
</p>

<p>"Oh, the wine<br/>

Of the vine<br/>

  May lead to the gates,<br/>

But the rattle<br/>

Of battle<br/>

  Wakes the angel who waits!<br/>
</p>

<p>"To the lord<br/>

Of the sword<br/>

  Open it must!<br/>

The drinker,<br/>

The thinker<br/>

  Sits in the dust!<br/>
</p>

<p>"He dreams<br/>

Of the gleams<br/>

  Of their garments of white;<br/>

He misses<br/>

Their kisses,<br/>

  The maidens of light!<br/>
</p>

<p>"They long<br/>

For the strong<br/>

  Who has burst through alarms—<br/>

Up, by the labour<br/>

Of stirrup and sabre,<br/>

  Up to their arms!<br/>
</p>

<p>"Oh, the wine of the grape is a feeble ghost!<br/>

The wine of the fight is the joy of a host!"<br/>
</p>

<p>  When Saad came home from the far pursuit,<br/>

An hour he sat, and an hour was mute.<br/>

Then he opened his mouth: "Ah, wife, the fight<br/>

Had been lost full sure, but an arm of might<br/>

Sudden rose up on the crest of the battle,<br/>

Flashed blue lightnings, thundered steel rattle,<br/>

Took up the fighting, and drove it on—<br/>

Enoch sure, or the good Saint John!<br/>

Wherever he leaped, like a lion he,<br/>

The battle was thickest, or soon to be!<br/>

Wherever he sprang with his lion roar,<br/>

In a minute the battle was there no more!<br/>

With a headlong fear, the sinners fled,<br/>

And we swept them down the steep of the dead:<br/>

Before us, not from us, did they flee,<br/>

They ceased in the depths of a new Red Sea!<br/>

But him who saved us we saw no more;<br/>

He went as he came, by a secret door!<br/>

And strangest of all—nor think I err<br/>

If a miracle I for truth aver—<br/>

I was close to him thrice—the holy Force<br/>

Wore my silver-ringed hauberk, rode Abdon my horse!"<br/>
</p>

<p>  The lady rose up, withholding her word,<br/>

And led to the terrace her wondering lord,<br/>

Where, song-soothed, and weary with battle strain,<br/>

Abu Midjan sat counting the links of his chain:<br/>

"The battle was raging, he raging worse;<br/>

I freed him, harnessed him, gave him thy horse."<br/>
</p>

<p>  "Abu Midjan! the singer of love and of wine!<br/>

The arm of the battle, it also was thine?<br/>

Rise up, shake the irons from off thy feet:<br/>

For the lord of the fight are fetters meet?<br/>

If thou wilt, then drink till thou be hoar:<br/>

Allah shall judge thee; I judge no more!"<br/>
</p>

<p>  Abu Midjan arose; he flung aside<br/>

The clanking fetters, and thus he cried:<br/>

"If thou give me to God and his decrees,<br/>

Nor purge my sin with the shame of these,<br/>

Wrath against me I dare not store:<br/>

In the name of Allah, I drink no more!"<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="an-old-story" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">An Old Story</h2>
<h5>I.</h5>

<p>  In the ancient house of ages,<br/>

      See, they cannot rest!<br/>

  With a hope, which awe assuages,<br/>

      Tremble all the blest.<br/>

  For the son and heir eternal,<br/>

      To be son yet more,<br/>

  Leaves his stately chair supernal<br/>

      For the earth's low floor;<br/>
</p>

<p>  Leaves the room so high and old,<br/>

      Leaves the all-world hearth,<br/>

  Seeks the out-air, frosty-cold,<br/>

      Of the twilight earth—<br/>

  To be throned in newer glory<br/>

      In a mother's lap,<br/>

  Gather up our broken story,<br/>

      And right every hap.<br/>
</p>

<h4>II.</h4>

<p>  There Earth's foster-baby lies,<br/>

      Sleep-dimmed all his graces,<br/>

  'Neath four stars of parents' eyes,<br/>

      And two heavens of faces!<br/>

  See! the cow and ass, dumb-staring,<br/>

      Feel the skirts of good<br/>

  Fold them in dull-blessed sharing<br/>

      Of infinitude.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Make a little room betwixt you,<br/>

      Pray you, Ass and Cow!<br/>

  Sure we shall, if I kneel next you,<br/>

      Know each other now!<br/>

  To the pit-fallen comes salvation—<br/>

      Love is never loath!<br/>

  Here we are, thy whole creation,<br/>

      Waiting, Lord, thy growth!<br/>
</p>

<h4>III.</h4>

<p>  On the slopes of Bethlehem,<br/>

      Round their resting sheep,<br/>

  Shepherds sat, and went and came,<br/>

      Guarding holy sleep;<br/>

  But the silent, high dome-spaces,<br/>

      Airy galleries,<br/>

  Thronged they were with watching faces,<br/>

      Thronged with open eyes.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Far across the desert floor,<br/>

      Come, slow-drawing nigher,<br/>

  Sages deep in starry lore,<br/>

      Priests of burning Fire.<br/>

  In the sky they read his story,<br/>

      And, through starlight cool,<br/>

  They come riding to the Glory,<br/>

      To the Wonderful.<br/>
</p>

<h4>IV.</h4>

<p>  Babe and mother, coming Mage,<br/>

      Shepherd, ass, and cow!<br/>

  Angels watching the new age,<br/>

      Time's intensest Now!<br/>

  Heaven down-brooding, Earth upstraining,<br/>

      Far ends closing in!<br/>

  Sure the eternal tide is gaining<br/>

      On the strand of sin!<br/>
</p>

<p>  See! but see! Heaven's chapel-master<br/>

      Signs with lifted hand;<br/>

  Winds divine blow fast and faster,<br/>

      Swelling bosoms grand.<br/>

  Hark the torrent-joy let slip!<br/>

      Hark the great throats ring!<br/>

  Glory! Peace! Good-fellowship!<br/>

      And a Child for king!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-book-of-dreams" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Book of Dreams</h2>
<h2>PART I.</h2>

<h4>  I.</h4>

<p>  I lay and dreamed. The Master came,<br/>

    In seamless garment drest;<br/>

  I stood in bonds 'twixt love and shame,<br/>

    Not ready to be blest.<br/>
</p>

<p>  He stretched his arms, and gently sought<br/>

    To clasp me to his heart;<br/>

  I shrank, for I, unthinking, thought<br/>

    He knew me but in part.<br/>
</p>

<p>  I did not love him as I would!<br/>

    Embraces were not meet!<br/>

  I dared not ev'n stand where he stood—<br/>

    I fell and kissed his feet.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Years, years have passed away since then;<br/>

    Oft hast thou come to me;<br/>

  The question scarce will rise again<br/>

    Whether I care for thee.<br/>
</p>

<p>  In thee lies hid my unknown heart,<br/>

    In thee my perfect mind;<br/>

  In all my joys, my Lord, thou art<br/>

    The deeper joy behind.<br/>
</p>

<p>  But when fresh light and visions bold<br/>

    My heart and hope expand,<br/>

  Up comes the vanity of old<br/>

    That now I understand:<br/>
</p>

<p>  Away, away from thee I drift,<br/>

    Forgetting, not forgot;<br/>

  Till sudden yawns a downward rift—<br/>

    I start—and see thee not.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Ah, then come sad, unhopeful hours!<br/>

    All in the dark I stray,<br/>

  Until my spirit fainting cowers<br/>

    On the threshold of the day.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Hence not even yet I child-like dare<br/>

    Nestle unto thy breast,<br/>

  Though well I know that only there<br/>

    Lies hid the secret rest.<br/>
</p>

<p>  But now I shrink not from thy will,<br/>

    Nor, guilty, judge my guilt;<br/>

  Thy good shall meet and slay my ill—<br/>

    Do with me as thou wilt.<br/>
</p>

<p>  If I should dream that dream once more,<br/>

    Me in my dreaming meet;<br/>

  Embrace me, Master, I implore,<br/>

    And let me kiss thy feet.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  II.</h4>

<p>  I stood before my childhood's home,<br/>

    Outside its belt of trees;<br/>

  All round my glances flit and roam<br/>

    O'er well-known hills and leas;<br/>
</p>

<p>  When sudden rushed across the plain<br/>

    A host of hurrying waves,<br/>

  Loosed by some witchery of the brain<br/>

    From far, dream-hidden caves.<br/>
</p>

<p>  And up the hill they clomb and came,<br/>

    A wild, fast-flowing sea:<br/>

  Careless I looked as on a game;<br/>

    No terror woke in me.<br/>
</p>

<p>  For, just the belting trees within,<br/>

    I saw my father wait;<br/>

  And should the waves the summit win,<br/>

    There was the open gate!<br/>
</p>

<p>  With him beside, all doubt was dumb;<br/>

    There let the waters foam!<br/>

  No mightiest flood would dare to come<br/>

    And drown his holy home!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Two days passed by. With restless toss,<br/>

    The red flood brake its doors;<br/>

  Prostrate I lay, and looked across<br/>

    To the eternal shores.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The world was fair, and hope was high;<br/>

    My friends had all been true;<br/>

  Life burned in me, and Death and I<br/>

    Would have a hard ado.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Sudden came back the dream so good,<br/>

    My trouble to abate:<br/>

  At his own door my Father stood—<br/>

    I just without the gate!<br/>
</p>

<p>  "Thou know'st what is, and what appears,"<br/>

    I said; "mine eyes to thine<br/>

  Are windows; thou hear'st with thine ears,<br/>

    But also hear'st with mine:"<br/>
</p>

<p>  "Thou knowest my weak soul's dismay,<br/>

    How trembles my life's node;<br/>

  Thou art the potter, I am the clay—<br/>

    'Tis thine to bear the load."<br/>
</p>

<h4>  III.</h4>

<p>  A piece of gold had left my purse,<br/>

    Which I had guarded ill;<br/>

  I feared a lack, but feared yet worse<br/>

    Regret returning still.<br/>
</p>

<p>  I lifted up my feeble prayer<br/>

    To him who maketh strong,<br/>

  That thence no haunting thoughts of care<br/>

    Might do my spirit wrong.<br/>
</p>

<p>  And even before my body slept,<br/>

    Such visions fair I had,<br/>

  That seldom soul with chamber swept<br/>

    Was more serenely glad.<br/>
</p>

<p>  No white-robed angel floated by<br/>

    On slow, reposing wings;<br/>

  I only saw, with inward eye,<br/>

    Some very common things.<br/>
</p>

<p>  First rose the scarlet pimpernel<br/>

    With burning purple heart;<br/>

  I saw within it, and could spell<br/>

    The lesson of its art.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Then came the primrose, child-like flower,<br/>

    And looked me in the face;<br/>

  It bore a message full of power,<br/>

    And confidence, and grace.<br/>
</p>

<p>  And breezes rose on pastures trim<br/>

    And bathed me all about;<br/>

  Wool-muffled sheep-bells babbled dim,<br/>

    Or only half spoke out.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Sudden it closed, some door of heaven,<br/>

    But what came out remained:<br/>

  The poorest man my loss had given<br/>

    For that which I had gained!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Thou gav'st me, Lord, a brimming cup<br/>

    Where I bemoaned a sip;<br/>

  How easily thou didst make up<br/>

   For that my fault let slip!<br/>
</p>

<p>  What said the flowers? what message new<br/>

    Embalmed my soul with rest?<br/>

  I scarce can tell—only they grew<br/>

    Right out of God's own breast.<br/>
</p>

<p>  They said, to every flower he made<br/>

    God's thought was root and stem—<br/>

  Perhaps said what the lilies said<br/>

    When Jesus looked at them.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  IV.</h4>

<p>  Sometimes, in daylight hours, awake,<br/>

    Our souls with visions teem<br/>

  Which to the slumbering brain would take<br/>

    The form of wondrous dream.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Once, with my thought-sight, I descried<br/>

    A plain with hills around;<br/>

  A lordly company on each side<br/>

    Leaves bare the middle ground.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Great terrace-steps at one end rise<br/>

    To something like a throne,<br/>

  And thither all the radiant eyes,<br/>

    As to a centre, shone.<br/>
</p>

<p>  A snow-white glory, dim-defined,<br/>

    Those seeking eyes beseech—<br/>

  Him who was not in fire or wind,<br/>

    But in the gentle speech.<br/>
</p>

<p>  They see his eyes far-fixed wait:<br/>

    Adown the widening vale<br/>

  They, turning, look; their breath they bate,<br/>

    With dread-filled wonder pale.<br/>
</p>

<p>  In raiment worn and blood-bedewed,<br/>

    With faltering step and numb,<br/>

  Toward the shining multitude<br/>

    A weary man did come.<br/>
</p>

<p>  His face was white, and still-composed,<br/>

    As of a man nigh dead;<br/>

  The eyes, through eyelids half unclosed,<br/>

    A faint, wan splendour shed.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Drops on his hair disordered hung<br/>

    Like rubies dull of hue;<br/>

  His hands were pitifully wrung,<br/>

    And stricken through and through.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Silent they stood with tender awe:<br/>

    Between their ranks he came;<br/>

  Their tearful eyes looked down, and saw<br/>

    What made his feet so lame.<br/>
</p>

<p>  He reached the steps below the throne,<br/>

    There sank upon his knees;<br/>

  Clasped his torn hands with stifled groan,<br/>

    And spake in words like these:—<br/>
</p>

<p>  "Father, I am come back. Thy will<br/>

    Is sometimes hard to do."<br/>

  From all that multitude so still<br/>

    A sound of weeping grew.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Then mournful-glad came down the One;<br/>

    He kneeled and clasped his child;<br/>

  Lay on his breast the outworn man,<br/>

    And wept until he smiled.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The people, who, in bitter woe<br/>

    And love, had sobbed and cried,<br/>

  Raised aweful eyes at length—and, Lo,<br/>

    The two sat side by side!<br/>
</p>

<h4>  V.</h4>

<p>  Dreaming I slept. Three crosses stood<br/>

    High in the gloomy air;<br/>

  One bore a thief, and one the Good;<br/>

    The other waited bare.<br/>
</p>

<p>  A soldier came up to the place,<br/>

    And took me for the third;<br/>

  My eyes they sought the Master's face,<br/>

    My will the Master's word.<br/>
</p>

<p>  He bent his head; I took the sign,<br/>

    And gave the error way;<br/>

  Gesture nor look nor word of mine<br/>

    The secret should betray.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The soldier from the cross's foot<br/>

    Turned. I stood waiting there:<br/>

  That grim, expectant tree, for fruit<br/>

    My dying form must bear.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Up rose the steaming mists of doubt<br/>

    And chilled both heart and brain;<br/>

  They shut the world of vision out,<br/>

    And fear saw only pain.<br/>
</p>

<p>  "Ah me, my hands! the hammer's blow!<br/>

    The nails that rend and pierce!<br/>

  The shock may stun, but, slow and slow,<br/>

    The torture will grow fierce."<br/>
</p>

<p>  "Alas, the awful fight with death!<br/>

    The hours to hang and die!<br/>

  The thirsting gasp for common breath!<br/>

    The weakness that would cry!"<br/>
</p>

<p>  My soul returned: "A faintness soon<br/>

    Will shroud thee in its fold;<br/>

  The hours will bring the fearful noon;<br/>

    'Twill pass—and thou art cold."<br/>
</p>

<p>  "'Tis his to care that thou endure,<br/>

    To curb or loose the pain;<br/>

  With bleeding hands hang on thy cure—<br/>

    It shall not be in vain."<br/>
</p>

<p>  But, ah, the will, which thus could quail,<br/>

    Might yield—oh, horror drear!<br/>

  Then, more than love, the fear to fail<br/>

    Kept down the other fear.<br/>
</p>

<p>  I stood, nor moved. But inward strife<br/>

    The bonds of slumber broke:<br/>

  Oh! had I fled, and lost the life<br/>

    Of which the Master spoke?<br/>
</p>

<h5>  VI.</h5>

<p>  Methinks I hear, as o'er this life's dim dial<br/>

    The last shades darken, friends say, "<i>He was good</i>;"<br/>

  I struggling fail to speak my faint denial—<br/>

    They whisper, "<i>His humility withstood</i>."<br/>
</p>

<p>  I, knowing better, part with love unspoken;<br/>

    And find the unknown world not all unknown:<br/>

  The bonds that held me from my centre broken,<br/>

    I seek my home, the Saviour's homely throne.<br/>
</p>

<p>  How he will greet me, walking on, I wonder;<br/>

    I think I know what I will say to him;<br/>

  I fear no sapphire floor of cloudless thunder,<br/>

    I fear no passing vision great and dim.<br/>
</p>

<p>  But he knows all my weary sinful story:<br/>

    How will he judge me, pure, and strong, and fair?<br/>

  I come to him in all his conquered glory,<br/>

    Won from the life that I went dreaming there!<br/>
</p>

<p>  I come; I fall before him, faintly saying:<br/>

    "Ah, Lord, shall I thy loving pardon win?<br/>

  Earth tempted me; my walk was but a straying;<br/>

    I have no honour—but may I come in?"<br/>
</p>

<p>  I hear him say: "Strong prayer did keep me stable;<br/>

    To me the earth was very lovely too:<br/>

  Thou shouldst have prayed; I would have made thee able<br/>

    To love it greatly!—but thou hast got through."<br/>
</p>

<h3>PART II.</h3>

<h3>  I.</h3>

<p>  A gloomy and a windy day!<br/>

    No sunny spot is bare;<br/>

  Dull vapours, in uncomely play,<br/>

    Go weltering through the air:<br/>

  If through the windows of my mind<br/>

    I let them come and go,<br/>

  My thoughts will also in the wind<br/>

    Sweep restless to and fro.<br/>
</p>

<p>  I drop my curtains for a dream.—<br/>

    What comes? A mighty swan,<br/>

  With plumage like a sunny gleam,<br/>

    And folded airy van!<br/>

  She comes, from sea-plains dreaming, sent<br/>

    By sea-maids to my shore,<br/>

  With stately head proud-humbly bent,<br/>

    And slackening swarthy oar.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Lone in a vaulted rock I lie,<br/>

     A water-hollowed cell,<br/>

  Where echoes of old storms go by,<br/>

    Like murmurs in a shell.<br/>

  The waters half the gloomy way<br/>

    Beneath its arches come;<br/>

  Throbbing to outside billowy play,<br/>

    The green gulfs waver dumb.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Undawning twilights through the cave<br/>

    In moony glimmers go,<br/>

  Half from the swan above the wave,<br/>

    Half from the swan below,<br/>
</p>

<p>  As to my feet she gently drifts<br/>

    Through dim, wet-shiny things,<br/>

  And, with neck low-curved backward, lifts<br/>

    The shoulders of her wings.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Old earth is rich with many a nest<br/>

    Of softness ever new,<br/>

  Deep, delicate, and full of rest—<br/>

    But loveliest there are two:<br/>

  I may not tell them save to minds<br/>

    That are as white as they;<br/>

  But none will hear, of other kinds—<br/>

    They all are turned away.<br/>
</p>

<p>  On foamy mounds between the wings<br/>

    Of a white sailing swan,<br/>

  A flaky bed of shelterings,<br/>

    There you will find the one.<br/>

  The other—well, it will not out,<br/>

    Nor need I tell it you;<br/>

  I've told you one, and can you doubt,<br/>

    When there are only two?<br/>
</p>

<p>  Fill full my dream, O splendid bird!<br/>

    Me o'er the waters bear:<br/>

  Never was tranquil ocean stirred<br/>

    By ship so shapely fair!<br/>

  Nor ever whiteness found a dress<br/>

    In which on earth to go,<br/>

  So true, profound, and rich, unless<br/>

    It was the falling snow!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Her wings, with flutter half-aloft,<br/>

    Impatient fan her crown;<br/>

  I cannot choose but nestle soft<br/>

    Into the depth of down.<br/>
</p>

<p>  With oary-pulsing webs unseen,<br/>

    Out the white frigate sweeps;<br/>

  In middle space we hang, between<br/>

    The air- and ocean-deeps.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Up the wave's mounting, flowing side,<br/>

    With stroke on stroke we rack;<br/>

  As down the sinking slope we slide,<br/>

    She cleaves a talking track—<br/>

  Like heather-bells on lonely steep,<br/>

    Like soft rain on the glass,<br/>

  Like children murmuring in their sleep,<br/>

    Like winds in reedy grass.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Her white breast heaving like a wave,<br/>

    She beats the solemn time;<br/>

  With slow strong sweep, intent and grave,<br/>

    Hearkens the ripples rime.<br/>

  All round, from flat gloom upward drawn,<br/>

    I catch the gleam, vague, wide,<br/>

  With which the waves, from dark to dawn,<br/>

    Heave up the polished side.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The night is blue; the stars aglow<br/>

    Crowd the still, vaulted steep,<br/>

  Sad o'er the hopeless, restless flow<br/>

    Of the self-murmurous deep—<br/>

  A thicker night, with gathered moan!<br/>

    A dull dethroned sky!<br/>

  The shadows of its stars alone<br/>

    Left in to know it by!<br/>
</p>

<p>  What faints across yon lifted loop<br/>

    Where the west gleams its last?<br/>

  With sea-veiled limbs, a sleeping group<br/>

    Of Nereids dreaming past.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Row on, fair swan;—who knows but I,<br/>

    Ere night hath sought her cave,<br/>

  May see in splendour pale float by<br/>

    The Venus of the wave!<br/>
</p>

<h4>  II.</h4>

<p>  A rainbow-wave o'erflowed her,<br/>

    A glory that deepened and grew,<br/>

  A song of colour and odour<br/>

    That thrilled her through and through:<br/>

  'Twas a dream of too much gladness<br/>

    Ever to see the light;<br/>

  They are only dreams of sadness<br/>

    That weary out the night.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Slow darkness began to rifle<br/>

    The nest of the sunset fair;<br/>

  Dank vapour began to stifle<br/>

    The scents that enriched the air;<br/>

  The flowers paled fast and faster,<br/>

    They crumbled, leaf and crown,<br/>

  Till they looked like the stained plaster<br/>

    Of a cornice fallen down.<br/>
</p>

<p>  And the change crept nigh and nigher,<br/>

    Inward and closer stole,<br/>

  Till the flameless, blasting fire<br/>

    Entered and withered her soul.—<br/>

  But the fiends had only flouted<br/>

    Her vision of the night;<br/>

  Up came the morn and routed<br/>

    The darksome things with light.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Wide awake I have often been in it—<br/>

    The dream that all is none;<br/>

  It will come in the gladdest minute<br/>

    And wither the very sun.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Two moments of sad commotion,<br/>

    One more of doubt's palsied rule—<br/>

  And the great wave-pulsing ocean<br/>

    Is only a gathered pool;<br/>
</p>

<p>  A flower is a spot of painting,<br/>

    A lifeless, loveless hue;<br/>

  Though your heart be sick to fainting<br/>

    It says not a word to you;<br/>

  A bird knows nothing of gladness,<br/>

    Is only a song-machine;<br/>

  A man is a reasoning madness,<br/>

    A woman a pictured queen!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Then fiercely we dig the fountain:<br/>

    Oh! whence do the waters rise?<br/>

  Then panting we climb the mountain:<br/>

    Oh! are there indeed blue skies?<br/>

  We dig till the soul is weary,<br/>

    Nor find the water-nest out;<br/>

  We climb to the stone-crest dreary,<br/>

    And still the sky is a doubt!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Let alone the roots of the fountain;<br/>

    Drink of the water bright;<br/>

  Leave the sky at rest on the mountain,<br/>

    Walk in its torrent of light;<br/>

  Although thou seest no beauty,<br/>

    Though widowed thy heart yet cries,<br/>

  With thy hands go and do thy duty,<br/>

    And thy work will clear thine eyes.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  III.</h4>

<p>  A great church in an empty square,<br/>

    A haunt of echoing tones!<br/>

  Feet pass not oft enough to wear<br/>

    The grass between the stones.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The jarring hinges of its gates<br/>

    A stifled thunder boom;<br/>

  The boding heart slow-listening waits,<br/>

    As for a coming doom.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The door stands wide. With hideous grin,<br/>

    Like dumb laugh, evil, frore,<br/>

  A gulf of death, all dark within,<br/>

    Hath swallowed half the floor.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Its uncouth sides of earth and clay<br/>

    O'erhang the void below;<br/>

  Ah, some one force my feet away,<br/>

    Or down I needs must go!<br/>
</p>

<p>  See, see the horrid, crumbling slope!<br/>

    It breathes up damp and fust!<br/>

  What man would for his lost loves grope<br/>

    Amid the charnel dust!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Down, down! The coffined mould glooms high!<br/>

    Methinks, with anguish dull,<br/>

  I enter by the empty eye<br/>

    Into a monstrous skull!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Stumbling on what I dare not guess,<br/>

    Blind-wading through the gloom,<br/>

  Still down, still on, I sink, I press,<br/>

    To meet some awful doom.<br/>
</p>

<p>  My searching hands have caught a door<br/>

    With iron clenched and barred:<br/>

  Here, the gaunt spider's castle-core,<br/>

    Grim Death keeps watch and ward!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Its two leaves shake, its bars are bowed,<br/>

    As if a ghastly wind,<br/>

  That never bore a leaf or cloud,<br/>

    Were pressing hard behind.<br/>
</p>

<p>  They shake, they groan, they outward strain:<br/>

    What thing of dire dismay<br/>

  Will freeze its form upon my brain,<br/>

    And fright my soul away?<br/>
</p>

<p>  They groan, they shake, they bend, they crack;<br/>

    The bars, the doors divide;<br/>

  A flood of glory at their back<br/>

    Hath burst the portals wide!<br/>
</p>

<p>  In flows a summer afternoon;<br/>

    I know the very breeze!<br/>

  It used to blow the silvery moon<br/>

    About the summer trees.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The gulf is filled with flashing tides;<br/>

    Blue sky through boughs looks in;<br/>

  Mosses and ferns o'er floor and sides<br/>

    A mazy arras spin.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The empty church, the yawning cleft,<br/>

    The earthy, dead despair<br/>

  Are gone, and I alive am left<br/>

    In sunshine and in air!<br/>
</p>

<h4>  IV.</h4>

<p>  Some dreams, in slumber's twilight, sly<br/>

    Through the ivory wicket creep;<br/>

  Then suddenly the inward eye<br/>

    Sees them outside the sleep.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Once, wandering in the border gray,<br/>

    I spied one past me swim;<br/>

  I caught it on its truant way<br/>

    To nowhere in the dim.<br/>
</p>

<p>  All o'er a steep of grassy ground,<br/>

    Lay ruined statues old,<br/>

  Such forms as never more are found<br/>

    Save deep in ancient mould,<br/>
</p>

<p>  A host of marble Anakim<br/>

    Shattered in deadly fight!<br/>

  Oh, what a wealth one broken limb<br/>

    Had been to waking sight!<br/>
</p>

<p>  But sudden, the weak mind to mock<br/>

    That could not keep its own,<br/>

  Without a shiver or a shock,<br/>

    Behold, the dream was gone!<br/>
</p>

<p>  For each dim form of marble rare<br/>

    Stood broken rush or reed;<br/>

  So bends on autumn field, long bare,<br/>

    Some tall rain-battered weed.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The shapeless night hung empty, drear,<br/>

    O'er my scarce slumbering head;<br/>

  There is no good in staying here,<br/>

    My spirit moaned, and fled.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  V.</h4>

<p>  The simplest joys that daily pass<br/>

    Grow ecstasies in sleep;<br/>

  A wind on heights of waving grass<br/>

    In a dream has made me weep.<br/>
</p>

<p>  No wonder then my heart one night<br/>

    Was joy-full to the brim:<br/>

  I was with one whose love and might<br/>

    Had drawn me close to him!<br/>
</p>

<p>  But from a church into the street<br/>

    Came pouring, crowding on,<br/>

  A troubled throng with hurrying feet,<br/>

    And Lo, my friend was gone!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Alone upon a miry road<br/>

    I walked a wretched plain;<br/>

  Onward without a goal I strode<br/>

    Through mist and drizzling rain.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Low mounds of ruin, ugly pits,<br/>

    And brick-fields scarred the globe;<br/>

  Those wastes where desolation sits<br/>

    Without her ancient robe.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The dreariness, the nothingness<br/>

    Grew worse almost than fear;<br/>

  If ever hope was needful bliss,<br/>

    Hope sure was needful here!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Did potent wish work joyous change<br/>

    Like wizard's glamour-spell?<br/>

  Wishes not always fruitless range,<br/>

    And sometimes it is well!<br/>
</p>

<p>  I know not. Sudden sank the way,<br/>

    Burst in the ocean-waves;<br/>

  Behold a bright, blue-billowed bay,<br/>

    Red rocks and sounding caves!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Dreaming, I wept. Awake, I ask—<br/>

    Shall earthly dreams, forsooth,<br/>

  Set the old Heavens too hard a task<br/>

    To match them with the truth?<br/>
</p>

<h4>  VI.</h4>

<p>  Once more I build a dream, awake,<br/>

    Which sleeping I would dream;<br/>

  Once more an unborn fancy take<br/>

    And try to make it seem!<br/>

  Some strange delight shall fill my breast,<br/>

    Enticed from sleep's abyss,<br/>

  With sense of motion, yet of rest,<br/>

    Of sleep, yet waking bliss!<br/>
</p>

<p>  It comes!—I lie on something warm<br/>

    That lifts me from below;<br/>

  It rounds me like a mighty arm<br/>

    Though soft as drifted snow.<br/>

  A dream, indeed!—Oh, happy me<br/>

    Whom Titan woman bears<br/>

  Afloat upon a gentle sea<br/>

    Of wandering midnight airs!<br/>
</p>

<p>  A breeze, just cool enough to lave<br/>

    With sense each conscious limb,<br/>

  Glides round and under, like a wave<br/>

    Of twilight growing dim!<br/>

  She bears me over sleeping towns,<br/>

    O'er murmuring ears of corn;<br/>

  O'er tops of trees, o'er billowy downs,<br/>

    O'er moorland wastes forlorn.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The harebells in the mountain-pass<br/>

    Flutter their blue about;<br/>

  The myriad blades of meadow grass<br/>

    Float scarce-heard music out.<br/>

  Over the lake!—ah! nearer float,<br/>

    Nearer the water's breast;<br/>

  Let me look deeper—let me doat<br/>

    Upon that lily-nest.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Old homes we brush—in wood, on road;<br/>

    Their windows do not shine;<br/>

  Their dwellers must be all abroad<br/>

    In lovely dreams like mine!<br/>

  Hark—drifting syllables that break<br/>

    Like foam-bells on fleet ships!<br/>

  The little airs are all awake<br/>

    With softly kissing lips.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Light laughter ripples down the wind,<br/>

    Sweet sighs float everywhere;<br/>

  But when I look I nothing find,<br/>

    For every star is there.<br/>

  O lady lovely, lady strong,<br/>

    Ungiven thy best gift lies!<br/>

  Thou bear'st me in thine arms along,<br/>

    Dost not reveal thine eyes!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Pale doubt lifts up a snaky crest,<br/>

    In darts a pang of loss:<br/>

  My outstretched hand, for hills of rest,<br/>

    Finds only mounds of moss!<br/>

  Faint and far off the stars appear;<br/>

    The wind begins to weep;<br/>

  'Tis night indeed, chilly and drear,<br/>

    And all but me asleep!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-aurelio-saffi" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To Aurelio Saffi</h2>
<p>  <i>To God and man be simply true;<br/>

  Do as thou hast been wont to do;<br/>

  Bring out thy treasures, old and new</i>—<br/>

  Mean all the same when said to you.<br/>
</p>

<p>  I love thee: thou art calm and strong;<br/>

  Firm in the right, mild to the wrong;<br/>

  Thy heart, in every raging throng,<br/>

  A chamber shut for prayer and song.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Defeat thou know'st not, canst not know,<br/>

  Although thy aims so lofty go<br/>

  They need as long to root and grow<br/>

  As infant hills to reach the snow.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Press on and prosper, holy friend!<br/>

  I, weak and ignorant, would lend<br/>

  A voice, thee, strong and wise, to send<br/>

  Prospering onward without end.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-m-d" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A. M. D.</h2>
<p>  Methinks I see thee, lying straight and low,<br/>

  Silent and darkling, in thy earthy bed,<br/>

  The mighty strength in which I trusted, fled,<br/>

  The long arms lying careless of kiss or blow;<br/>

  On thy tall form I see the night-robe flow<br/>

  Down from the pale, composed face—thy head<br/>

  Crowned with its own dark curls: though thou wast dead,<br/>

  They dressed thee as for sleep, and left thee so!<br/>

  My heart, with cares and questionings oppressed,<br/>

  Not oft since thou didst leave us turns to thee;<br/>

  But wait, my brother, till I too am dead,<br/>

  And thou shalt find that heart more true, more free,<br/>

  More ready in thy love to take its rest,<br/>

  Than when we lay together in one bed.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-memorial-of-africa" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Memorial of Africa</h2>
<h4>  I.</h4>

<p>  Upon a rock I sat—a mountain-side,<br/>

  Far, far forsaken of the old sea's lip;<br/>

  A rock where ancient waters' rise and dip,<br/>

  Recoil and plunge, eddy, and oscillant tide,<br/>

  Had worn and worn, while races lived and died,<br/>

  Involved channels. Where the sea-weed's drip<br/>

  Followed the ebb, now crumbling lichens sip<br/>

  Sparse dews of heaven that down with sunset slide.<br/>

  I sat long-gazing southward. A dry flow<br/>

  Of withering wind sucked up my drooping strength,<br/>

  Itself weak from the desert's burning length.<br/>

  Behind me piled, away and up did go<br/>

  Great sweeps of savage mountains—up, away,<br/>

  Where snow gleams ever, panthers roam, they say.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  II.</h4>

<p>  This infant world has taken long to make,<br/>

  Nor hast Thou done with it, but mak'st it yet,<br/>

  And wilt be working on when death has set<br/>

  A new mound in some churchyard for my sake.<br/>

  On flow the centuries without a break;<br/>

  Uprise the mountains, ages without let;<br/>

  The lichens suck; the hard rock's breast they fret;<br/>

  Years more than past, the young earth yet will take.<br/>

  But in the dumbness of the rolling time,<br/>

  No veil of silence shall encompass me—<br/>

  Thou wilt not once forget and let me be;<br/>

  Rather wouldst thou some old chaotic prime<br/>

  Invade, and, moved by tenderness sublime,<br/>

  Unfold a world, that I, thy child, might see.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-gift" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Gift</h2>
My gift would find thee fast asleep,
  And arise a dream in thee;
A violet sky o'er the roll and sweep
  Of a purple and pallid sea;
And a crescent moon from my sky should creep
  In the golden dream to thee.

Thou shouldst lay thee down, and sadly list
  To the wail of our cold birth-time;
And build thee a temple, glory-kissed,
  In the heart of the sunny clime;
Its columns should rise in a music-mist,
  And its roofs in a spirit-rhyme.

Its pillars the solemn hills should bind
  'Neath arches of starry deeps;
Its floor the earth all veined and lined;
  Its organ the ocean-sweeps;
And, swung in the hands of the grey-robed wind,
  Its censers the blossom-heaps.

And 'tis almost done; for in this my rhyme,
  Thanks to thy mirror-soul,
Thou wilt see the mountains, and hear the chime
  Of the waters after the roll;
And the stars of my sky thy sky will climb,
  And with heaven roof in the whole.
		</article>
		<article id="the-man-of-songs" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Man of Songs</h2>
<p>"Thou wanderest in the land of dreams,<br/>

  O man of many songs!<br/>

To thee what is, but looks and seems;<br/>

  No realm to thee belongs!"<br/>
</p>

<p>"Seest thou those mountains, faint and far,<br/>

  O spirit caged and tame?"<br/>

"Blue clouds like distant hills they are,<br/>

  And like is not the same."<br/>
</p>

<p>"Nay, nay; I know each mountain well,<br/>

  Each cliff, and peak, and dome!<br/>

In that cloudland, in one high dell,<br/>

  Nesteth my little home."<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="better-things" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Better Things</h2>
<p>  Better to smell the violet<br/>

  Than sip the glowing wine;<br/>

  Better to hearken to a brook<br/>

  Than watch a diamond shine.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Better to have a loving friend<br/>

  Than ten admiring foes;<br/>

  Better a daisy's earthy root<br/>

  Than a gorgeous, dying rose.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Better to love in loneliness<br/>

  Than bask in love all day;<br/>

  Better the fountain in the heart<br/>

  Than the fountain by the way.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Better be fed by mother's hand<br/>

  Than eat alone at will;<br/>

  Better to trust in God, than say,<br/>

  My goods my storehouse fill.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Better to be a little wise<br/>

  Than in knowledge to abound;<br/>

  Better to teach a child than toil<br/>

  To fill perfection's round.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Better to sit at some man's feet<br/>

  Than thrill a listening state;<br/>

  Better suspect that thou art proud<br/>

  Than be sure that thou art great.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Better to walk the realm unseen<br/>

  Than watch the hour's event;<br/>

  Better the <i>Well done, faithful slave</i>!<br/>

  Than the air with shoutings rent.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Better to have a quiet grief<br/>

  Than many turbulent joys;<br/>

  Better to miss thy manhood's aim<br/>

  Than sacrifice the boy's.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Better a death when work is done<br/>

  Than earth's most favoured birth;<br/>

  Better a child in God's great house<br/>

  Than the king of all the earth.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-journey" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Journey</h2>
<h5>I.</h5>

<p>Hark, the rain is on my roof!<br/>

Every murmur, through the dark,<br/>

Stings me with a dull reproof<br/>

Like a half-extinguished spark.<br/>

Me! ah me! how came I here,<br/>

Wide awake and wide alone!<br/>

Caught within a net of fear,<br/>

All my dreams undreamed and gone!<br/>
</p>

<p>I will rise; I will go forth.<br/>

Better dare the hideous night,<br/>

Better face the freezing north<br/>

Than be still, where is no light!<br/>

Black wind rushing round me now,<br/>

Sown with arrowy points of rain!<br/>

Gone are there and then and now—<br/>

I am here, and so is pain!<br/>
</p>

<p>Dead in dreams the gloomy street!<br/>

I will out on open roads.<br/>

Eager grow my aimless feet—<br/>

Onward, onward something goads!<br/>

I will take the mountain path,<br/>

Beard the storm within its den;<br/>

Know the worst of this dim wrath<br/>

Harassing the souls of men.<br/>
</p>

<p>Chasm 'neath chasm! rock piled on rock!<br/>

Roots, and crumbling earth, and stones!<br/>

Hark, the torrent's thundering shock!<br/>

Hark, the swaying pine tree's groans!<br/>

Ah! I faint, I fall, I die,<br/>

Sink to nothingness away!—<br/>

Lo, a streak upon the sky!<br/>

Lo, the opening eye of day!<br/>
</p>

<h5>II.</h5>

<p>Mountain summits lift their snows<br/>

O'er a valley green and low;<br/>

And a winding pathway goes<br/>

Guided by the river's flow;<br/>

And a music rises ever,<br/>

As of peace and low content,<br/>

From the pebble-paven river<br/>

Like an odour upward sent.<br/>
</p>

<p>And the sound of ancient harms<br/>

Moans behind, the hills among,<br/>

Like the humming of the swarms<br/>

That unseen the forest throng.<br/>

Now I meet the shining rain<br/>

From a cloud with sunny weft;<br/>

Now against the wind I strain,<br/>

Sudden burst from mountain cleft.<br/>
</p>

<p>Now a sky that hath a moon<br/>

Staining all the cloudy white<br/>

With a faded rainbow—soon<br/>

Lost in deeps of heavenly night!<br/>

Now a morning clear and soft,<br/>

Amber on the purple hills;<br/>

Warm blue day of summer, oft<br/>

Cooled by wandering windy rills!<br/>
</p>

<p>Joy to travel thus along<br/>

With the universe around!<br/>

Every creature of the throng,<br/>

Every sight and scent and sound<br/>

Homeward speeding, beauty-laden,<br/>

Beelike, to its hive, my soul!<br/>

Mine the eye the stars are made in!<br/>

Mine the heart of Nature's whole!<br/>
</p>

<h5>III.</h5>

<p>Hills retreating on each hand<br/>

Slowly sink into the plain;<br/>

Solemn through the outspread land<br/>

Rolls the river to the main.<br/>

In the glooming of the night<br/>

Something through the dusky air<br/>

Doubtful glimmers, faintly white,<br/>

But I know not what or where.<br/>
</p>

<p>Is it but a chalky ridge<br/>

Bared of sod, like tree of bark?<br/>

Or a river-spanning bridge<br/>

Miles away into the dark?<br/>

Or the foremost leaping waves<br/>

Of the everlasting sea,<br/>

Where the Undivided laves<br/>

Time with its eternity?<br/>
</p>

<p>Is it but an eye-made sight,<br/>

In my brain a fancied gleam?<br/>

Or a faint aurora-light<br/>

From the sun's tired smoking team?<br/>

In the darkness it is gone,<br/>

Yet with every step draws nigh;<br/>

Known shall be the thing unknown<br/>

When the morning climbs the sky!<br/>
</p>

<p>Onward, onward through the night<br/>

Matters it I cannot see?<br/>

I am moving in a might<br/>

Dwelling in the dark and me!<br/>

End or way I cannot lose—<br/>

Grudge to rest, or fear to roam;<br/>

All is well with wanderer whose<br/>

Heart is travelling hourly home.<br/>
</p>

<h5>IV.</h5>

<p>Joy! O joy! the dawning sea<br/>

Answers to the dawning sky,<br/>

Foretaste of the coming glee<br/>

When the sun will lord it high!<br/>

See the swelling radiance growing<br/>

To a dazzling glory-might!<br/>

See the shadows gently going<br/>

'Twixt the wave-tops wild with light!<br/>
</p>

<p>Hear the smiting billows clang!<br/>

See the falling billows lean<br/>

Half a watery vault, and hang<br/>

Gleaming with translucent green,<br/>

Then in thousand fleeces fall,<br/>

Thundering light upon the strand!—<br/>

This the whiteness which did call<br/>

Through the dusk, across the land!<br/>
</p>

<p>See, a boat! Out, out we dance!<br/>

Fierce blasts swoop upon my sail!<br/>

What a terrible expanse—<br/>

Tumbling hill and heaving dale!<br/>

Stayless, helpless, lost I float,<br/>

Captive to the lawless free!<br/>

But a prison is my boat!<br/>

Oh, for petrel-wings to flee!<br/>
</p>

<p>Look below: each watery whirl<br/>

Cast in beauty's living mould!<br/>

Look above: each feathery curl<br/>

Dropping crimson, dropping gold!—<br/>

Oh, I tremble in the flush<br/>

Of the everlasting youth!<br/>

Love and awe together rush:<br/>

I am free in God, the Truth!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="prayer" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Prayer</h2>
<p>  We doubt the word that tells us: Ask,<br/>

      And ye shall have your prayer;<br/>

  We turn our thoughts as to a task,<br/>

      With will constrained and rare.<br/>
</p>

<p>  And yet we have; these scanty prayers<br/>

      Yield gold without alloy:<br/>

  O God, but he that trusts and dares<br/>

      Must have a boundless joy!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="rest" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Rest</h2>
<h5>I.</h5>

<p>  When round the earth the Father's hands<br/>

      Have gently drawn the dark;<br/>

  Sent off the sun to fresher lands,<br/>

      And curtained in the lark;<br/>

  'Tis sweet, all tired with glowing day,<br/>

      To fade with fading light,<br/>

  And lie once more, the old weary way,<br/>

      Upfolded in the night.<br/>
</p>

<p>  If mothers o'er our slumbers bend,<br/>

      And unripe kisses reap,<br/>

  In soothing dreams with sleep they blend,<br/>

      Till even in dreams we sleep.<br/>

  And if we wake while night is dumb,<br/>

      'Tis sweet to turn and say,<br/>

  It is an hour ere dawning come,<br/>

      And I will sleep till day.<br/>
</p>

<h4>II.</h4>

<p>  There is a dearer, warmer bed,<br/>

      Where one all day may lie,<br/>

  Earth's bosom pillowing the head,<br/>

      And let the world go by.<br/>

  There come no watching mother's eyes,<br/>

      The stars instead look down;<br/>

  Upon it breaks, and silent dies,<br/>

      The murmur of the town.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The great world, shouting, forward fares:<br/>

      This chamber, hid from none,<br/>

  Hides safe from all, for no one cares<br/>

      For him whose work is done.<br/>

  Cheer thee, my friend; bethink thee how<br/>

      A certain unknown place,<br/>

  Or here or there, is waiting now,<br/>

      To rest thee from thy race.<br/>
</p>

<h4>III.</h4>

<p>  Nay, nay, not there the rest from harms,<br/>

      The still composed breath!<br/>

  Not there the folding of the arms,<br/>

      The cool, the blessed death!<br/>

  <i>That</i> needs no curtained bed to hide<br/>

      The world with all its wars,<br/>

  No grassy cover to divide<br/>

      From sun and moon and stars.<br/>
</p>

<p>  It is a rest that deeper grows<br/>

      In midst of pain and strife;<br/>

  A mighty, conscious, willed repose,<br/>

      The death of deepest life.<br/>

  To have and hold the precious prize<br/>

      No need of jealous bars;<br/>

  But windows open to the skies,<br/>

      And skill to read the stars!<br/>
</p>

<h4>IV.</h4>

<p>  Who dwelleth in that secret place,<br/>

      Where tumult enters not,<br/>

  Is never cold with terror base,<br/>

      Never with anger hot.<br/>

  For if an evil host should dare<br/>

      His very heart invest,<br/>

  God is his deeper heart, and there<br/>

      He enters in to rest.<br/>
</p>

<p>  When mighty sea-winds madly blow,<br/>

      And tear the scattered waves,<br/>

  Peaceful as summer woods, below<br/>

      Lie darkling ocean caves:<br/>

  The wind of words may toss my heart,<br/>

      But what is that to me!<br/>

  Tis but a surface storm—thou art<br/>

      My deep, still, resting sea.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-a-j-scott-with-the-following-poem" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To A. J. Scott with the Following Poem</h2>
<h5>   WITH THE FOLLOWING POEM.</h5>

<p>  I walked all night: the darkness did not yield.<br/>

  Around me fell a mist, a weary rain,<br/>

  Enduring long. At length the dawn revealed<br/>
</p>

<p>  A temple's front, high-lifted from the plain.<br/>

  Closed were the lofty doors that led within;<br/>

  But by a wicket one might entrance gain.<br/>
</p>

<p>  'Twas awe and silence when I entered in;<br/>

  The night, the weariness, the rain were lost<br/>

  In hopeful spaces. First I heard a thin<br/>
</p>

<p>  Sweet sound of voices low, together tossed,<br/>

  As if they sought some harmony to find<br/>

  Which they knew once, but none of all that host<br/>
</p>

<p>  Could wile the far-fled music back to mind.<br/>

  Loud voices, distance-low, wandered along<br/>

  The pillared paths, and up the arches twined<br/>
</p>

<p>  With sister arches, rising, throng on throng,<br/>

  Up to the roof's dim height. At broken times<br/>

  The voices gathered to a burst of song,<br/>
</p>

<p>  But parted sudden, and were but single rimes<br/>

  By single bells through Sabbath morning sent,<br/>

  That have no thought of harmony or chimes.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Hopeful confusion! Who could be content<br/>

  Looking and hearkening from the distant door?<br/>

  I entered further. Solemnly it went—<br/>
</p>

<p>  Thy voice, Truth's herald, walking the untuned roar,<br/>

  Calm and distinct, powerful and sweet and fine:<br/>

  I loved and listened, listened and loved more.<br/>
</p>

<p>  May not the faint harp, tremulous, combine<br/>

  Its ghostlike sounds with organ's mighty tone?<br/>

  Let my poor song be taken in to thine.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Will not thy heart, with tempests of its own,<br/>

  Yet hear aeolian sighs from thin chords blown?<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="light" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Light</h2>
<p>  First-born of the creating Voice!<br/>

  Minister of God's Spirit, who wast sent<br/>

  Waiting upon him first, what time he went<br/>

  Moving about mid the tumultuous noise<br/>

  Of each unpiloted element<br/>

  Upon the face of the void formless deep!<br/>

  Thou who didst come unbodied and alone<br/>

  Ere yet the sun was set his rule to keep,<br/>

  Or ever the moon shone,<br/>

  Or e'er the wandering star-flocks forth were driven!<br/>

  Thou garment of the Invisible, whose skirt<br/>

  Sweeps, glory-giving, over earth and heaven!<br/>

  Thou comforter, be with me as thou wert<br/>

  When first I longed for words, to be<br/>

  A radiant garment for my thought, like thee!<br/>
</p>

<p>  We lay us down in sorrow,<br/>

  Wrapt in the old mantle of our mother Night;<br/>

  In vexing dreams we strive until the morrow;<br/>

  Grief lifts our eyelids up—and Lo, the light!<br/>

  The sunlight on the wall! And visions rise<br/>

  Of shining leaves that make sweet melodies;<br/>

  Of wind-borne waves with thee upon their crests;<br/>

  Of rippled sands on which thou rainest down;<br/>

  Of quiet lakes that smooth for thee their breasts;<br/>

  Of clouds that show thy glory as their own;<br/>

  O joy! O joy! the visions are gone by!<br/>

  Light, gladness, motion, are reality!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Thou art the god of earth. The skylark springs<br/>

  Far up to catch thy glory on his wings;<br/>

  And thou dost bless him first that highest soars.<br/>

  The bee comes forth to see thee; and the flowers<br/>

  Worship thee all day long, and through the skies<br/>

  Follow thy journey with their earnest eyes.<br/>

  River of life, thou pourest on the woods,<br/>

  And on thy waves float out the wakening buds;<br/>

  The trees lean toward thee, and, in loving pain,<br/>

  Keep turning still to see thee yet again;<br/>

  South sides of pines, haunted all day by thee,<br/>

  Bear violins that tremble humanly.<br/>

  And nothing in thine eyes is mean or low:<br/>

  Where'er thou art, on every side,<br/>

  All things are glorified;<br/>

  And where thou canst not come, there thou dost throw<br/>

  Beautiful shadows, made out of the dark,<br/>

  That else were shapeless; now it bears thy mark.<br/>
</p>

<p>  And men have worshipped thee.<br/>

  The Persian, on his mountain-top,<br/>

  Waits kneeling till thy sun go up,<br/>

  God-like in his serenity.<br/>

  All-giving, and none-gifted, he draws near,<br/>

  And the wide earth waits till his face appear—<br/>

  Longs patient. And the herald glory leaps<br/>

  Along the ridges of the outlying clouds,<br/>

  Climbing the heights of all their towering steeps.<br/>

  Sudden, still multitudinous laughter crowds<br/>

  The universal face: Lo, silently,<br/>

  Up cometh he, the never-closing eye!<br/>

  Symbol of Deity, men could not be<br/>

  Farthest from truth when they were kneeling unto thee!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Thou plaything of the child,<br/>

  When from the water's surface thou dost spring,<br/>

  Thyself upon his chamber ceiling fling,<br/>

  And there, in mazy dance and motion wild,<br/>

  Disport thyself—etherial, undefiled.<br/>

  Capricious, like the thinkings of the child!<br/>

  I am a child again, to think of thee<br/>

  In thy consummate glee.<br/>

  How I would play with thee, athirst to climb<br/>

  On sloping ladders of thy moted beams,<br/>

  When through the gray dust darting in long streams!<br/>

  How marvel at the dusky glimmering red,<br/>

  With which my closed fingers thou hadst made<br/>

  Like rainy clouds that curtain the sun's bed!<br/>

  And how I loved thee always in the moon!<br/>

  But most about the harvest-time,<br/>

  When corn and moonlight made a mellow tune,<br/>

  And thou wast grave and tender as a cooing dove!<br/>

  And then the stars that flashed cold, deathless love!<br/>

  And the ghost-stars that shimmered in the tide!<br/>

  And more mysterious earthly stars,<br/>

  That shone from windows of the hill and glen—<br/>

  Thee prisoned in with lattice-bars,<br/>

  Mingling with household love and rest of weary men!<br/>

  And still I am a child, thank God!—to spy<br/>

  Thee starry stream from bit of broken glass<br/>

  Upon the brown earth undescried,<br/>

  Is a found thing to me, a gladness high,<br/>

  A spark that lights joy's altar-fire within,<br/>

  A thought of hope to prophecy akin,<br/>

  That from my spirit fruitless will not pass.<br/>
</p>

<p>                  Thou art the joy of age:<br/>

  Thy sun is dear when long the shadow falls.<br/>

  Forth to its friendliness the old man crawls,<br/>

  And, like the bird hung out in his poor cage<br/>

  To gather song from radiance, in his chair<br/>

  Sits by the door; and sitteth there<br/>

  His soul within him, like a child that lies<br/>

  Half dreaming, with half-open eyes,<br/>

  At close of a long afternoon in summer—<br/>

  High ruins round him, ancient ruins, where<br/>

  The raven is almost the only comer—<br/>

  Half dreams, half broods, in wonderment<br/>

  At thy celestial ascent<br/>

  Through rifted loop to light upon the gold<br/>

  That waves its bloom in some high airy rent:<br/>

  So dreams the old man's soul, that is not old,<br/>

  But sleepy mid the ruins that infold.<br/>
</p>

<p>              What soul-like changes, evanescent moods,<br/>

  Upon the face of the still passive earth,<br/>

  Its hills, and fields, and woods,<br/>

  Thou with thy seasons and thy hours art ever calling forth!<br/>

  Even like a lord of music bent<br/>

  Over his instrument,<br/>

  Giving to carol, now to tempest birth!<br/>

  When, clear as holiness, the morning ray<br/>

  Casts the rock's dewy darkness at its feet,<br/>

  Mottling with shadows all the mountain gray;<br/>

  When, at the hour of sovereign noon,<br/>

  Infinite silent cataracts sheet<br/>

  Shadowless through the air of thunder-breeding June;<br/>

  When now a yellower glory slanting passes<br/>

  'Twixt longer shadows o'er the meadow grasses;<br/>

  And now the moon lifts up her shining shield,<br/>

  High on the peak of a cloud-hill revealed;<br/>

  Now crescent, low, wandering sun-dazed away,<br/>

  Unconscious of her own star-mingled ray,<br/>

  Her still face seeming more to think than see,<br/>

  Makes the pale world lie dreaming dreams of thee!<br/>

  No mood, eternal or ephemeral,<br/>

  But wakes obedient at thy silent call!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Of operative single power,<br/>

  And simple unity the one emblem,<br/>

  Yet all the colours that our passionate eyes devour,<br/>

  In rainbow, moonbow, or in opal gem,<br/>

  Are the melodious descant of divided thee.<br/>

  Lo thee in yellow sands! Lo thee<br/>

  In the blue air and sea!<br/>

  In the green corn, with scarlet poppies lit,<br/>

  Thy half-souls parted, patient thou dost sit.<br/>

  Lo thee in dying triumphs of the west!<br/>

  Lo thee in dew-drop's tiny breast!<br/>

  Thee on the vast white cloud that floats away,<br/>

  Bearing upon its skirt a brown moon-ray!<br/>

  Gold-regent, thou dost spendthrift throw<br/>

  Thy hoardless wealth of gleam and glow!<br/>

  The thousand hues and shades upon the flowers<br/>

  Are all the pastime of thy leisure hours;<br/>

  The jewelled ores in mines that hidden be,<br/>

  Are dead till touched by thee.<br/>
</p>

<p>                                Everywhere,<br/>

  Thou art lancing through the air!<br/>

  Every atom from another<br/>

  Takes thee, gives thee to his brother;<br/>

  Continually,<br/>

  Thou art wetting the wet sea,<br/>

  Bathing its sluggish woods below,<br/>

  Making the salt flowers bud and blow;<br/>

  Silently,<br/>

  Workest thou, and ardently,<br/>

  Waking from the night of nought<br/>

  Into being and to thought;<br/>
</p>

<p>                      Influences<br/>

  Every beam of thine dispenses,<br/>

  Potent, subtle, reaching far,<br/>

  Shooting different from each star.<br/>

  Not an iron rod can lie<br/>

  In circle of thy beamy eye,<br/>

  But its look doth change it so<br/>

  That it cannot choose but show<br/>

  Thou, the worker, hast been there;<br/>

  Yea, sometimes, on substance rare,<br/>

  Thou dost leave thy ghostly mark<br/>

  Even in what men call the dark.<br/>

  Ever doing, ever showing,<br/>

  Thou dost set our hearts a glowing—<br/>

  Universal something sent<br/>

  To shadow forth the Excellent!<br/>
</p>

<p>  When the firstborn affections—<br/>

  Those winged seekers of the world within,<br/>

  That search about in all directions,<br/>

  Some bright thing for themselves to win—<br/>

  Through pathless woods, through home-bred fogs,<br/>

  Through stony plains, through treacherous bogs,<br/>

  Long, long, have followed faces fair,<br/>

  Fair soul-less faces, vanished into air,<br/>

  And darkness is around them and above,<br/>

  Desolate of aught to love,<br/>

  And through the gloom on every side,<br/>

  Strange dismal forms are dim descried,<br/>

  And the air is as the breath<br/>

  From the lips of void-eyed Death,<br/>

  And the knees are bowed in prayer<br/>

  To the Stronger than despair—<br/>

  Then the ever-lifted cry,<br/>

  <i>Give us light, or we shall die</i>,<br/>

  Cometh to the Father's ears,<br/>

  And he hearkens, and he hears:—<br/>
</p>

<p>  As some slow sun would glimmer forth<br/>

  From sunless winter of the north,<br/>

  We, hardly trusting hopeful eyes,<br/>

  Discern and doubt the opening skies.<br/>

  From a misty gray that lies on<br/>

  Our dim future's far horizon,<br/>

  It grows a fresh aurora, sent<br/>

  Up the spirit's firmament,<br/>

  Telling, through the vapours dun,<br/>

  Of the coming, coming sun!<br/>

  Tis Truth awaking in the soul!<br/>

  His Righteousness to make us whole!<br/>

  And what shall we, this Truth receiving,<br/>

  Though with but a faint believing,<br/>

  Call it but eternal Light?<br/>

  'Tis the morning, 'twas the night!<br/>
</p>

<p>               All things most excellent<br/>

  Are likened unto thee, excellent thing!<br/>

  Yea, he who from the Father forth was sent,<br/>

  Came like a lamp, to bring,<br/>

  Across the winds and wastes of night,<br/>

  The everlasting light.<br/>

  Hail, Word of God, the telling of his thought!<br/>

  Hail, Light of God, the making-visible!<br/>

  Hail, far-transcending glory brought<br/>

  In human form with man to dwell—<br/>

  Thy dazzling gone; thy power not less<br/>

  To show, irradiate, and bless;<br/>

  The gathering of the primal rays divine<br/>

  Informing chaos, to a pure sunshine!<br/>
</p>

<p>         Dull horrid pools no motion making!<br/>

  No bubble on the surface breaking!<br/>

  The dead air lies, without a sound,<br/>

  Heavy and moveless on the marshy ground.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Rushing winds and snow-like drift,<br/>

  Forceful, formless, fierce, and swift!<br/>

  Hair-like vapours madly riven!<br/>

  Waters smitten into dust!<br/>

  Lightning through the turmoil driven,<br/>

  Aimless, useless, yet it must!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Gentle winds through forests calling!<br/>

  Bright birds through the thick leaves glancing!<br/>

  Solemn waves on sea-shores falling!<br/>

  White sails on blue waters dancing!<br/>

  Mountain streams glad music giving!<br/>

  Children in the clear pool laving!<br/>

  Yellow corn and green grass waving!<br/>

  Long-haired, bright-eyed maidens living!<br/>

  Light, O radiant, it is thou!<br/>

  Light!—we know our Father now!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Forming ever without form;<br/>

  Showing, but thyself unseen;<br/>

  Pouring stillness on the storm;<br/>

  Breathing life where death had been!<br/>

  If thy light thou didst draw in,<br/>

  Death and Chaos soon were out,<br/>

  Weltering o'er the slimy sea,<br/>

  Riding on the whirlwind's rout,<br/>

  In wild unmaking energy!<br/>

  God, be round us and within,<br/>

  Fighting darkness, slaying sin.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Father of Lights, high-lost, unspeakable,<br/>

  On whom no changing shadow ever fell!<br/>

  Thy light we know not, are content to see;<br/>

  Thee we know not, and are content to be!—<br/>

  Nay, nay! until we know thee, not content are we!<br/>

  But, when thy wisdom cannot be expressed,<br/>

  Shall we imagine darkness in thy breast?<br/>

  Our hearts awake and witness loud for thee!<br/>

  The very shadows on our souls that lie,<br/>

  Good witness to the light supernal bear;<br/>

  The something 'twixt us and the sky<br/>

  Could cast no shadow if light were not there!<br/>

  If children tremble in the night,<br/>

  It is because their God is light!<br/>

  The shining of the common day<br/>

  Is mystery still, howe'er it ebb and flow—<br/>

  Behind the seeing orb, the secret lies:<br/>

  Thy living light's eternal play,<br/>

  Its motions, whence or whither, who shall know?—<br/>

  Behind the life itself, its fountains rise!<br/>

  In thee, the Light, the darkness hath no place;<br/>

  And we <i>have</i> seen thee in the Saviour's face.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Enlighten me, O Light!—why art thou such?<br/>

  Why art thou awful to our eyes, and sweet?<br/>

  Cherished as love, and slaying with a touch?<br/>

  Why in thee do the known and unknown meet?<br/>

  Why swift and tender, strong and delicate?<br/>

  Simple as truth, yet manifold in might?<br/>

  Why does one love thee, and another hate?<br/>

  Why cleave my words to the portals of my speech<br/>

  When I a goodly matter would indite?<br/>

  Why mounts my thought of thee beyond my reach?<br/>

  —In vain to follow thee, I thee beseech,<br/>

  For God is light.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-a-j-scott" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To A. J. Scott</h2>
<p>  When, long ago, the daring of my youth<br/>

  Drew nigh thy greatness with a little thing,<br/>

  Thou didst receive me; and thy sky of truth<br/>
</p>

<p>  Has domed me since, a heaven of sheltering,<br/>

  Made homely by the tenderness and grace<br/>

  Which round thy absolute friendship ever fling<br/>
</p>

<p>  A radiant atmosphere. Turn not thy face<br/>

  From that small part of earnest thanks, I pray,<br/>

  Which, spoken, leaves much more in speechless case.<br/>
</p>

<p>  I see thee far before me on thy way<br/>

  Up the great peaks, and striding stronger still;<br/>

  Thy intellect unrivalled in its sway,<br/>
</p>

<p>  Upheld and ordered by a regnant will;<br/>

  Thy wisdom, seer and priest of holy fate,<br/>

  Searching all truths its prophecy to fill;<br/>
</p>

<p>  But this my joy: throned in thy heart so great,<br/>

  High Love is queen, and sits without a mate.<br/>
</p>

<p><i>May</i>, 1857.</p>
		</article>
		<article id="were-i-a-skilful-painter" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Were I a Skilful Painter</h2>
<p>Were I a skilful painter,<br/>

My pencil, not my pen,<br/>

Should try to teach thee hope and fear,<br/>

And who would blame me then?—<br/>

Fear of the tide of darkness<br/>

That floweth fast behind,<br/>

And hope to make thee journey on<br/>

In the journey of the mind.<br/>
</p>

<p>Were I a skilful painter,<br/>

What should I paint for thee?—<br/>

A tiny spring-bud peeping out<br/>

From a withered wintry tree;<br/>

The warm blue sky of summer<br/>

O'er jagged ice and snow,<br/>

And water hurrying gladsome out<br/>

From a cavern down below;<br/>
</p>

<p>The dim light of a beacon<br/>

Upon a stormy sea,<br/>

Where a lonely ship to windward beats<br/>

For life and liberty;<br/>

A watery sun-ray gleaming<br/>

Athwart a sullen cloud<br/>

And falling on some grassy flower<br/>

The rain had earthward bowed;<br/>
</p>

<p>Morn peeping o'er a mountain,<br/>

In ambush for the dark,<br/>

And a traveller in the vale below<br/>

Rejoicing like a lark;<br/>

A taper nearly vanished<br/>

Amid the dawning gray,<br/>

And a maiden lifting up her head,<br/>

And lo, the coming day!<br/>
</p>

<p>I am no skilful painter;<br/>

Let who will blame me then<br/>

That I would teach thee hope and fear<br/>

With my plain-talking pen!—<br/>

Fear of the tide of darkness<br/>

That floweth fast behind,<br/>

And hope to make thee journey on<br/>

In the journey of the mind.<br/>
</p>

		</article>
		<article id="if-i-were-a-monk-and-thou-wert-a-nun" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">If I Were a Monk, and Thou Wert a Nun</h2>
<p>  If I were a monk, and thou wert a nun,<br/>

          Pacing it wearily, wearily,<br/>

  Twixt chapel and cell till day were done—<br/>

          Wearily, wearily—<br/>

  How would it fare with these hearts of ours<br/>

  That need the sunshine, and smiles, and flowers?<br/>
</p>

<p>  To prayer, to prayer, at the matins' call,<br/>

          Morning foul or fair!—<br/>

  Such prayer as from weary lips might fall—<br/>

          Words, but hardly prayer—<br/>

  The chapel's roof, like the law in stone,<br/>

  Caging the lark that up had flown!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Thou, in the glory of cloudless noon,<br/>

          The God-revealing,<br/>

  Turning thy face from the boundless boon—<br/>

          Painfully kneeling;<br/>

  Or, in brown-shadowy solitude,<br/>

  Bending thy head o'er the legend rude!<br/>
</p>

<p>  I, in a bare and lonely nook,<br/>

          Gloomily, gloomily,<br/>

  Poring over some musty book,<br/>

          Thoughtfully, thoughtfully;<br/>

  Or painting pictures of things of old<br/>

  On parchment-margin in purple and gold!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Perchance in slow procession to meet,<br/>

          Wearily, wearily,<br/>

  In antique, narrow, high-gabled street,<br/>

          Wearily, wearily;<br/>

  Thine eyes dark-lifted to mine, and then<br/>

  Heavily sinking to earth again!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Sunshine and air! bird-music and spring!<br/>

          Merrily, merrily!—<br/>

  Back to its cell each weary thing,<br/>

          Wearily, wearily!<br/>

  Our poor hearts, withered and dry and old,<br/>

  Most at home in the cloister cold!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Thou slow rising at vespers' call,<br/>

          Wearily, wearily;<br/>

  I looking up on the darkening wall,<br/>

          Wearily, wearily;<br/>

  The chime so sweet to the boat at sea,<br/>

  Listless and dead to thee and me!<br/>
</p>

<p>  At length for sleep a weary assay,<br/>

          On the lone couch wearily!<br/>

  Rising at midnight again to pray,<br/>

          Wearily, wearily!<br/>

  And if through the dark dear eyes looked in,<br/>

  Sending them far as a thought of sin!<br/>
</p>

<p>  And at last, thy tired soul passing away,<br/>

          Dreamily, dreamily—<br/>

  Its worn tent fluttering in slow decay,<br/>

          Sleepily, sleepily—<br/>

  Over thee held the crucified Best,<br/>

  But no warm cheek to thy cold cheek pressed!<br/>
</p>

<p>  And then my passing from cell to clay,<br/>

          Dreamily, dreamily!<br/>

  My gray head lying on ashes gray,<br/>

          Sleepily, sleepily!<br/>

  But no woman-angel hovering above,<br/>

  Ready to clasp me in deathless love!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Now, now, ah, now! thy hand in mine,<br/>

          Peacefully, peacefully;<br/>

  My arm round thee, and my lips on thine,<br/>

          Lovingly, lovingly—<br/>

  Oh! is not a better thing to us given<br/>

  Than wearily going alone to heaven?<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="blessed-are-the-meek-for-they-shall-inherit-the-earth" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Blessed Are the Meek, for They Shall Inherit the Earth</h2>
<p>  A quiet heart, submissive, meek,<br/>

      Father, do thou bestow,<br/>

  Which more than granted, will not seek<br/>

      To have, or give, or know.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Each little hill then holds its gift<br/>

      Forth to my joying eyes;<br/>

  Each mighty mountain then doth lift<br/>

      My spirit to the skies.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Lo, then the running water sounds<br/>

      With gladsome, secret things!<br/>

  The silent water more abounds,<br/>

      And more the hidden springs.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Live murmurs then the trees will blend<br/>

      With all the feathered song;<br/>

  The waving grass low tribute lend<br/>

      Earth's music to prolong.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The sun will cast great crowns of light<br/>

      On waves that anthems roar;<br/>

  The dusky billows break at night<br/>

      In flashes on the shore.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Each harebell, each white lily's cup,<br/>

      The hum of hidden bee,<br/>

  Yea, every odour floating up,<br/>

      The insect revelry—<br/>
</p>

<p>  Each hue, each harmony divine<br/>

      The holy world about,<br/>

  Its soul will send forth into mine,<br/>

      My soul to widen out.<br/>
</p>

<p>  And thus the great earth I shall hold,<br/>

      A perfect gift of thine;<br/>

  Richer by these, a thousandfold,<br/>

      Than if broad lands were mine.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-hills" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Hills</h2>
<p>Behind my father's cottage lies<br/>

  A gentle grassy height<br/>

Up which I often ran—to gaze<br/>

  Back with a wondering sight,<br/>

For then the chimneys I thought high<br/>

  Were down below me quite!<br/>
</p>

<p>All round, where'er I turned mine eyes,<br/>

  Huge hills closed up the view;<br/>

The town 'mid their converging roots<br/>

  Was clasped by rivers two;<br/>

From, one range to another sprang<br/>

  The sky's great vault of blue.<br/>
</p>

<p>It was a joy to climb their sides,<br/>

  And in the heather lie!<br/>

A joy to look at vantage down<br/>

  On the castle grim and high!<br/>

Blue streams below, white clouds above,<br/>

  In silent earth and sky!<br/>
</p>

<p>And now, where'er my feet may roam,<br/>

  At sight of stranger hill<br/>

A new sense of the old delight<br/>

  Springs in my bosom still,<br/>

And longings for the high unknown<br/>

  Their ancient channels fill.<br/>
</p>

<p>For I am always climbing hills,<br/>

  From the known to the unknown—<br/>

Surely, at last, on some high peak,<br/>

  To find my Father's throne,<br/>

Though hitherto I have only found<br/>

  His footsteps in the stone!<br/>
</p>

<p>And in my wanderings I did meet<br/>

  Another searching too:<br/>

The dawning hope, the shared quest<br/>

  Our thoughts together drew;<br/>

Fearless she laid her band in mine<br/>

  Because her heart was true.<br/>
</p>

<p>She was not born among the hills,<br/>

  Yet on each mountain face<br/>

A something known her inward eye<br/>

  By inborn light can trace;<br/>

For up the hills must homeward be,<br/>

  Though no one knows the place.<br/>
</p>

<p>Clasp my hand close, my child, in thine—<br/>

  A long way we have come!<br/>

Clasp my hand closer yet, my child,<br/>

  Farther we yet must roam—<br/>

Climbing and climbing till we reach<br/>

  Our heavenly father's home.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="i-know-what-beauty-is" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">I Know What Beauty Is</h2>
<p>  I know what beauty is, for thou<br/>

      Hast set the world within my heart;<br/>

      Of me thou madest it a part;<br/>

  I never loved it more than now.<br/>
</p>

<p>  I know the Sabbath afternoons;<br/>

      The light asleep upon the graves:<br/>

      Against the sky the poplar waves;<br/>

  The river murmurs organ tunes.<br/>
</p>

<p>  I know the spring with bud and bell;<br/>

      The hush in summer woods at night;<br/>

      Autumn, when trees let in more light;<br/>

  Fantastic winter's lovely spell.<br/>
</p>

<p>  I know the rapture music gives,<br/>

      Its mystery of ordered tones:<br/>

      Dream-muffled soul, it loves and moans,<br/>

  And, half-alive, comes in and lives.<br/>
</p>

<p>  And verse I know, whose concord high<br/>

      Of thought and music lifts the soul<br/>

      Where many a glimmering starry shoal<br/>

  Glides through the Godhead's living sky.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Yea, Beauty's regnant All I know—<br/>

      The imperial head, the thoughtful eyes;<br/>

      The God-imprisoned harmonies<br/>

  That out in gracious motions go.<br/>
</p>

<p>  But I leave all, O Son of man,<br/>

      Put off my shoes, and come to thee!<br/>

      Most lovely thou of all I see,<br/>

  Most potent thou of all that can!<br/>
</p>

<p>  As child forsakes his favourite toy,<br/>

      His sisters' sport, his new-found nest,<br/>

      And, climbing to his mother's breast,<br/>

  Enjoys yet more his late-left joy—<br/>
</p>

<p>  I lose to find. On fair-browed bride<br/>

      Fair pearls their fairest light afford;<br/>

      So, gathered round thy glory, Lord,<br/>

  All glory else is glorified.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="i-would-i-were-a-child" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">I Would I Were a Child</h2>
<p>    I would I were a child,<br/>

  That I might look, and laugh, and say, My Father!<br/>

  And follow thee with running feet, or rather<br/>

      Be led through dark and wild!<br/>
</p>

<p>      How I would hold thy hand,<br/>

  My glad eyes often to thy glory lifting!<br/>

  Should darkness 'twixt thy face and mine come drifting,<br/>

      My heart would but expand.<br/>
</p>

<p>      If an ill thing came near,<br/>

  I would but creep within thy mantle's folding,<br/>

  Shut my eyes close, thy hand yet faster holding,<br/>

      And soon forget my fear.<br/>
</p>

<p>      O soul, O soul, rejoice!<br/>

  Thou art God's child indeed, for all thy sinning;<br/>

  A poor weak child, yet his, and worth the winning<br/>

      With saviour eyes and voice.<br/>
</p>

<p>      Who spake the words? Didst Thou?<br/>

  They are too good, even for such a giver:<br/>

  Such water drinking once, I should feel ever<br/>

      As I had drunk but now.<br/>
</p>

<p>      Yet sure the Word said so,<br/>

  Teaching our lips to cry with his, Our Father!<br/>

  Telling the tale of him who once did gather<br/>

      His goods to him, and go!<br/>
</p>

<p>      Ah, thou dost lead me, God!<br/>

  But it is dark and starless, the way dreary;<br/>

  Almost I sleep, I am so very weary<br/>

      Upon this rough hill-road.<br/>
</p>

<p>      <i>Almost</i>! Nay, I <i>do</i> sleep;<br/>

  There is no darkness save in this my dreaming;<br/>

  Thy fatherhood above, around, is beaming;<br/>

      Thy hand my hand doth keep.<br/>
</p>

<p>      With sighs my soul doth teem;<br/>

  I have no knowledge but that I am sleeping;<br/>

  Haunted with lies, my life will fail in weeping;<br/>

      Wake me from this my dream.<br/>
</p>

<p>      How long shall heavy night<br/>

  Deny the day? How long shall this dull sorrow<br/>

  Say in my heart that never any morrow<br/>

      Will bring the friendly light?<br/>
</p>

<p>      Lord, art thou in the room?<br/>

  Come near my bed; oh, draw aside the curtain!<br/>

  A child's heart would say <i>Father</i>, were it certain<br/>

      That it would not presume.<br/>
</p>

<p>      But if this dreary sleep<br/>

  May not be broken, help thy helpless sleeper<br/>

  To rest in thee; so shall his sleep grow deeper—<br/>

      For evil dreams too deep.<br/>
</p>

<p>      <i>Father</i>! I dare at length;<br/>

  My childhood sure will hold me free from blaming:<br/>

  Sinful yet hoping, I to thee come, claiming<br/>

      Thy tenderness, my strength.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-lost-soul" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Lost Soul</h2>
<p>  Look! look there!<br/>

Send your eyes across the gray<br/>

By my finger-point away<br/>

Through the vaporous, fumy air.<br/>

Beyond the air, you see the dark?<br/>

Beyond the dark, the dawning day?<br/>

On its horizon, pray you, mark<br/>

Something like a ruined heap<br/>

Of worlds half-uncreated, that go back:<br/>

Down all the grades through which they rose<br/>

Up to harmonious life and law's repose,<br/>

Back, slow, to the awful deep<br/>

Of nothingness, mere being's lack:<br/>

On its surface, lone and bare,<br/>

Shapeless as a dumb despair,<br/>

Formless, nameless, something lies:<br/>

Can the vision in your eyes<br/>

Its idea recognize?<br/>
</p>

<p>  'Tis a poor lost soul, alack!—<br/>

Half he lived some ages back;<br/>

But, with hardly opened eyes,<br/>

Thinking him already wise,<br/>

Down he sat and wrote a book;<br/>

Drew his life into a nook;<br/>

Out of it would not arise<br/>

To peruse the letters dim,<br/>

Graven dark on his own walls;<br/>

Those, he judged, were chance-led scrawls,<br/>

Or at best no use to him.<br/>

A lamp was there for reading these;<br/>

This he trimmed, sitting at ease,<br/>

For its aid to write his book,<br/>

Never at his walls to look—<br/>

Trimmed and trimmed to one faint spark<br/>

Which went out, and left him dark.—<br/>

I will try if he can hear<br/>

Spirit words with spirit ear!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Motionless thing! who once,<br/>

Like him who cries to thee,<br/>

Hadst thy place with thy shining peers,<br/>

Thy changeful place in the changeless dance<br/>

Issuing ever in radiance<br/>

From the doors of the far eternity,<br/>

With feet that glitter and glide and glance<br/>

To the music-law that binds the free,<br/>

And sets the captive at liberty—<br/>

To the clang of the crystal spheres!<br/>

O heart for love! O thirst to drink<br/>

From the wells that feed the sea!<br/>

O hands of truth, a human link<br/>

'Twixt mine and the Father's knee!<br/>

O eyes to see! O soul to think!<br/>

O life, the brother of me!<br/>

Has Infinitude sucked back all<br/>

The individual life it gave?<br/>

Boots it nothing to cry and call?<br/>

Is thy form an empty grave?<br/>
</p>

<p>  It heareth not, brothers, the terrible thing!<br/>

Sounds no sense to its ear will bring!<br/>

Let us away, 'tis no use to tarry;<br/>

Love no light to its heart will carry!<br/>

Sting it with words, it will never shrink;<br/>

It will not repent, it cannot think!<br/>

Hath God forgotten it, alas!<br/>

Lost in eternity's lumber-room?<br/>

Will the wind of his breathing never pass<br/>

Over it through the insensate gloom?<br/>

Like a frost-killed bud on a tombstone curled,<br/>

Crumbling it lies on its crumbling world,<br/>

Sightless and deaf, with never a cry,<br/>

In the hell of its own vacuity!<br/>
</p>

<p>  See, see yon angel crossing our flight<br/>

Where the thunder vapours loom,<br/>

From his upcast pinions flashing the light<br/>

Of some outbreaking doom!<br/>

Up, brothers! away! a storm is nigh!<br/>

Smite we the wing up a steeper sky!<br/>

What matters the hail or the clashing winds,<br/>

The thunder that buffets, the lightning that blinds!<br/>

We know by the tempest we do not lie<br/>

Dead in the pits of eternity!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-dream-within-a-dream" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Dream Within a Dream</h2>
THE OUTER DREAM.

Young, as the day's first-born Titanic brood,
Lifting their foreheads jubilant to heaven,
Rose the great mountains on my opening dream.
And yet the aged peace of countless years
Reposed on every crag and precipice
Outfacing ruggedly the storms that swept
Far overhead the sheltered furrow-vales;
Which smiled abroad in green as the clouds broke
Drifting adown the tide of the wind-waves,
Till shattered on the mountain rocks. Oh! still,
And cold and hard to look upon, like men
Who do stern deeds in times of turbulence,
Quell the hail-rattle with their granite brows,
And let the thunder burst and pass away--
They too did gather round sky-dwelling peaks
The trailing garments of the travelling sun,
Which he had lifted from his ocean-bed,
And swept along his road. They rent them down
In scattering showers upon the trees and grass,
In noontide rains with heavy ringing drops,
Or in still twilight moisture tenderly.
And from their sides were born the gladsome streams;
Some creeping gently out in tiny springs,
As they were just created, scarce a foot
From the hill's surface, in the matted roots
Of plants, whose green betrays the secret birth;
Some hurrying forth from caverns deep and dark,
Upfilling to the brim a basin huge,
Thick covered with soft moss, greening the wave,
As evermore it welled over the edge
Upon the rocks below in boiling heaps;
Fit basin for a demi-god at morn,
Waking amid the crags, to lave his limbs,
Then stride, Hyperion, o'er sun-paven peaks.
And down the hill-side sped the fresh-born wave,
Now hid from sight in arched caverns cold,
Now arrowing slantwise down the terraced steep,
Now springing like a child from step to step
Of the rough water-stair; until it found
A deep-hewn passage for its slower course,
Guiding it down to lowliness and rest,
Betwixt wet walls of darkness, darker yet
With pine trees lining all their sides like hair,
Or as their own straight needles clothe their boughs;
Until at length in broader light it ran,
With more articulate sounds amid the stones,
In the slight shadow of the maiden birch,
And the stream-loving willow; and ere long
Great blossoming trees dropt flowers upon its breast;
Chiefly the crimson-spotted, cream-white flowers,
Heaped up in cones amid cone-drooping leaves;
Green hanging leaf-cones, towering white flower-cones
Upon the great cone-fashioned chestnut tree.
Each made a tiny ripple where it fell,
The trembling pleasure of the smiling wave,
Which bore it then, in slow funereal course,
Down to the outspread sunny sheen, where lies
The lake uplooking to the far-off snow,
Its mother still, though now so far away;
Feeding it still with long descending lines
Of shining, speeding streams, that gather peace
In journeying to the rest of that still lake
Now lying sleepy in the warm red sun,
Which says its dear goodnight, and goeth down.

All pale, and withered, and disconsolate,
The moon is looking on impatiently;
For 'twixt the shining tent-roof of the day,
And the sun-deluged lake, for mirror-floor,
Her thin pale lamping is too sadly grey
To shoot, in silver-barbed, white-plumed arrows,
Cold maiden splendours on the flashing fish:
Wait for thy empire Night, day-weary moon!
And thou shalt lord it in one realm at least,
Where two souls walk a single Paradise.
Take to thee courage, for the sun is gone;
His praisers, the glad birds, have hid their heads;
Long, ghost-like forms of trees lie on the grass;
All things are clothed in an obscuring light,
Fusing their outline in a dreamy mass;
Some faint, dim shadows from thy beauty fall
On the clear lake which melts them half away--
Shine faster, stronger, O reviving moon!
Burn up, O lamp of Earth, hung high in Heaven!

And through a warm thin summer mist she shines,
A silver setting to the diamond stars;
And the dark boat cleaveth a glittering way,
Where the one steady beauty of the moon
Makes many changing beauties on the wave
Broken by jewel-dropping oars, which drive
The boat, as human impulses the soul;
While, like the sovereign will, the helm's firm law
Directs the whither of the onward force.
At length midway he leaves the swaying oars
Half floating in the blue gulf underneath,
And on a load of gathered flowers reclines,
Leaving the boat to any air that blows,
His soul to any pulse from the unseen heart.
Straight from the helm a white hand gleaming flits,
And settles on his face, and nestles there,
Pale, night-belated butterfly, to sleep.
For on her knees his head lies satisfied;
And upward, downward, dark eyes look and rest,
Finding their home in likeness.   Lifting then
Her hair upon her white arm heavily,
The overflowing of her beauteousness,
Her hand that cannot trespass, singles out
Some of the curls that stray across her lap;
And mingling dark locks in the pallid light,
She asks him which is darker of the twain,
Which his, which hers, and laugheth like a lute.
But now her hair, an unvexed cataract,
Falls dark and heavy round his upturned face,
And with a heaven shuts out the shallow sky,
A heaven profound, the home of two black stars;
Till, tired with gazing, face to face they lie,
Suspended, with closed eyelids, in the night;
Their bodies bathed in conscious sleepiness,
While o'er their souls creeps every rippling breath
Of the night-gambols of the moth-winged wind,
Flitting a handbreadth, folding up its wings,
Its dreamy wings, then spreading them anew,
And with an unfelt gliding, like the years,
Wafting them to a water-lily bed,
Whose shield-like leaves and chalice-bearing arms
Hold back the boat from the slow-sloping shore,
Far as a child might shoot with his toy-bow.
There the long drooping grass drooped to the wave;
And, ever as the moth-wind lit thereon,
A small-leafed tree, whose roots were always cool,
Dipped one low bow, with many sister-leaves,
Upon the water's face with a low plash,
Lifting and dipping yet and yet again;
And aye the water-drops rained from the leaves,
With music-laughter as they found their home.
And from the woods came blossom-fragrance, faint,
Or full, like rising, falling harmonies;
Luxuriance of life, which overflows
In scents ethereal on the ocean air;
Each breathing on the rest the blessedness
Of its peculiar being, filled with good
Till its cup runneth over with delight:
They drank the mingled odours as they lay,
The air in which the sensuous being breathes,
Till summer-sleep fell on their hearts and eyes.

The night was mild and innocent of ill;
'Twas but a sleeping day that breathed low,
And babbled in its sleep. The moon at length
Grew sleepy too. Her level glances crept
Through sleeping branches to their curtained eyes,
As down the steep bank of the west she slid,
Slowly and slowly

                 But alas! alas!
The awful time 'twixt moondown and sunrise!
It is a ghostly time. A low thick fog
Steamed up and swathed the trees, and overwhelmed
The floating couch with pall on pall of grey.
The sky was desolate, dull, and meaningless.
The blazing hues of the last sunset eve,
And the pale magic moonshine that had made
The common, strange,--all were swept clean away;
The earth around, the great sky over, were
Like a deserted theatre, tomb-dumb;
The lights long dead; the first sick grey of morn
Oozing through rents in the slow-mouldering curtain;
The sweet sounds fled away for evermore;
Nought left, except a creeping chill, a sense
As if dead deeds were strown upon the stage,
As if dead bodies simulated life,
And spoke dead words without informing thought.
A horror, as of power without a soul,
Dark, undefined, and mighty unto ill,
Jarred through the earth and through the vault-like air.

And on the sleepers fell a wondrous dream,
That dured till sunrise, filling all the cells
Remotest of the throbbing heart and brain.
And as I watched them, ever and anon
The quivering limb and half-unclosèd eye
Witnessed of torture scarce endured, and yet
Endured; for still the dream had mastery,
And held them in a helplessness supine;
Till, by degrees, the labouring breath grew calm,
Save frequent murmured sighs; and o'er each face
Stole radiant sadness, and a hopeful grief;
And the convulsive motion passed away.

Upon their faces, reading them, I gazed,--
Reading them earnestly, like wondrous book,--
When suddenly the vapours of the dream
Rose and enveloped me, and through my soul
Passed with possession; will fell fast asleep.
And through the portals of the spirit-land,
Upon whose frontiers time and space grow dumb,
Quenched like a cloud that all the roaring wind
Drives not beyond the mountain top, I went,
And entering, beheld them in their dream.
Their world inwrapt me for the time as mine,
And what befel them there, I saw, and tell.


THE INNER DREAM.

It was a drizzly morning where I stood.
The cloud had sunk, and filled with fold on fold
The chimneyed city; so the smoke rose not,
But spread diluted in the cloud, and fell
A black precipitate on miry streets,
Where dim grey faces vision-like went by,
But half-awake, half satisfied with sleep.

Slave engines had begun their ceaseless growl
Of labour. Iron bands and huge stone blocks
That held them to their task, strained, shook, until
The city trembled. Those pale-visaged forms
Were hastening on to feed their groaning strength
With labour to the full.

                        Look! there they come,
Poor amid poverty; she with her gown
Drawn over her meek head; he trying much,
But fruitless half, to shield her from the rain.
They enter the wide gates, amid the jar,
And clash, and shudder of the awful force
That, conquering force, still vibrates on, as if
With an excess of power, hungry for work.
With differing strength to different tasks they part,
To be the soul of knowledge unto strength;
For man has eked his body out with wheels,
And cranks, and belts, and levers, pinions, screws--
One body all, pervaded still with life
From man the maker's will. 'Mid keen-eyed men,
Thin featured and exact, his part is found;
Hers where the dusk air shines with lustrous eyes.

And there they laboured through the murky day,
Whose air was livid mist, their only breath;
Foul floating dust of swift revolving wheels
And feathery spoil of fast contorted threads
Making a sultry chaos in the sun.
Until at length slow swelled the welcome dark,
A dull Lethean heaving tide of death,
Up from the caves of Night to make an end;
And filling every corner of the place,
Choked in its waves the clanking of the looms.
And Earth put on her sleeping dress, and took
Her children home into its bosom-folds,
And nursed them as a mother-ghost might sit
With her neglected darlings in the dark.
So with dim satisfaction in their hearts,
Though with tired feet and aching head, they went,
Parting the clinging fog to find their home.
It was a dreary place. Unfinished walls,
Far drearier than ruins overspread
With long-worn sweet forgetfulness, amidst
Earth-heaps and bricks, rain-pools and ugliness,
Rose up around, banishing further yet
The Earth, with its spring-time, young-mother smile,
From children's eyes that had forgot to play.
But though the house was dull and wrapt in fog,
It yet awoke to life, yea, cheerfulness,
When darkness oped a fire-eye in the grate,
And the dim candle's smoky flame revealed
A room which could not be all desolate,
Being a temple, proven by the signs
Seen in the ancient place. For here was light;
And blazing fire with darkness on its skirts;
Bread; and pure water, ready to make clean,
Beside a chest of holiday attire;
And in the twilight edges of the light,
A book scarce seen; and for the wondrous veil,
Those human forms, behind which lay concealed
The Holy of Holies, God's own secret place,
The lowly human heart wherein He dwells.
And by the table-altar they sat down
To eat their Eucharist, God feeding them:
Their food was Love, made visible in Form--
Incarnate Love in food. For he to whom
A common meal can be no Eucharist,
Who thanks for food and strength, not for the love
That made cold water for its blessedness,
And wine for gladness' sake, has yet to learn
The heart-delight of inmost thankfulness
For innermost reception.

                        Then they sat
Resting with silence, the soul's inward sleep,
Which feedeth it with strength; till gradually
They grew aware of light, that overcame
The light within, and through the dingy blind,
Cast from the window-frame, two shadow-glooms
That made a cross of darkness on the white,
Dark messenger of light itself unseen.
The woman rose, and half she put aside
The veil that hid the whole of glorious night;
And lo! a wind had mowed the earth-sprung fog;
And lo! on high the white exultant moon
From clear blue window curtained all with white,
Greeted them, at their shadowy window low,
With quiet smile; for two things made her glad:
One that she saw the glory of the sun;
For while the earth lay all athirst for light,
She drank the fountain-waves. The other joy;
Sprung from herself: she fought the darkness well,
Thinning the great cone-shadow of the earth,
Paling its ebon hue with radiant showers
Upon its sloping side. The woman said,
With hopeful look: "To-morrow will be bright
With sunshine for our holiday--to-morrow--
Think! we shall see the green fields in the sun."
So with hearts hoping for a simple joy,
Yet high withal, being no less than the sun,
They laid them down in nightly death that waits
Patiently for the day.

                      That sun was high
When they awoke at length. The moon, low down,
Had almost vanished, clothed upon with light;
And night was swallowed up of day. In haste,
Chiding their weariness that leagued with sleep,
They, having clothed themselves in clean attire,
By the low door, stooping with priestly hearts,
Entered God's vision-room, his wonder-world.

One side the street, the windows all were moons
To light the other that in shadow lay.
The path was almost dry; the wind asleep.
And down the sunny side a woman came
In a red cloak that made the whole street glad--
Fit clothing, though she was so feeble and old;
For when they stopped and asked her how she fared,
She said with cheerful words, and smile that owed
None of its sweetness to an ivory lining:
"I'm always better in the open air."
"Dear heart!" said they, "how freely she will breathe
In the open air of heaven!" She stood in the morn
Like a belated autumn-flower in spring,
Dazed by the rushing of the new-born life
Up the earth's winding cavern-stairs to see
Through window-buds the calling, waking sun.
Or as in dreams we meet the ghost of one
Beloved in youth, who walketh with few words,
And they are of the past. Yet, joy to her!
She too from earthy grave was climbing up
Unto the spirit-windows high and far,
She the new life for a celestial spring,
Answering the light that shineth evermore.

With hopeful sadness thus they passed along
Dissolving streets towards the smiles of spring,
Of which green visions gleamed and glided by,
Across far-narrowing avenues of brick:
The ripples only of her laughter float
Through the low winding caverns of the town;
Yet not a stone upon the paven street,
But shareth in the impulse of her joy,
Heaven's life that thrills anew through the outworn earth;
Descending like the angel that did stir
Bethesda's pool, and made the sleepy wave
Pulse with quick healing through the withered limb,
In joyous pangs. By an unfinished street,
Forth came they on a wide and level space;
Green fields lay side by side, and hedgerow trees
Stood here and there as waiting for some good.
But no calm river meditated through
The weary flat to the less level sea;
No forest trees on pillared stems and boughs
Bent in great Gothic arches, bore aloft
A cloudy temple-roof of tremulous leaves;
No clear line where the kissing lips of sky
And earth meet undulating, but a haze
That hides--oh, if it hid wild waves! alas!
It hides but fields, it hides but fields and trees!
Save eastward, where a few hills, far away,
Came forth in the sun, or drew back when the clouds
Went over them, dissolving them in shade.
But the life-robe of earth was beautiful,
As all most common things are loveliest;
A forest of green waving fairy trees,
That carpeted the earth for lowly feet,
Bending unto their tread, lowliest of all
Earth's lowly children born for ministering
Unto the heavenly stranger, stately man;
That he, by subtle service from all kinds,
From every breeze and every bounding wave,
From night-sky cavernous with heaps of storm,
And from the hill rejoicing in the sun,
Might grow a humble, lowly child of God;
Lowly, as knowing his high parentage;
Humble, because all beauties wait on him,
Like lady-servants ministering for love.
And he that hath not rock, and hill, and stream,
Must learn to look for other beauty near;
To know the face of ocean solitudes,
The darkness dashed with glory, and the shades
Wind-fretted, and the mingled tints upthrown
From shallow bed, or raining from the sky.
And he that hath not ocean, and dwells low,
Not hill-befriended, if his eyes have ceased
To drink enjoyment from the billowy grass,
And from the road-side flower (like one who dwells
With homely features round him every day,
And so takes refuge in the loving eyes
Which are their heaven, the dwelling-place of light),
Must straightway lift his eyes unto the heavens,
Like God's great palette, where His artist hand
Never can strike the brush, but beauty wakes;
Vast sweepy comet-curves, that net the soul
In pleasure; endless sky-stairs; patient clouds,
White till they blush at the sun's goodnight kiss;
And filmy pallours, and great mountain crags.
But beyond all, absorbing all the rest,
Lies the great heaven, the expression of deep space,
Foreshortened to a vaulted dome of blue;
The Infinite, crowded in a single glance,
Where yet the eye descends depth within depth;
Like mystery of Truth, clothed in high form,
Evasive, spiritual, no limiting,
But something that denies an end, and yet
Can be beheld by wondering human eyes.
There looking up, one well may feel how vain
To search for God in this vast wilderness!
For over him would arch void depth for ever;
Nor ever would he find a God or Heaven,
Though lifting wings were his to soar abroad
Through boundless heights of space; or eyes to dive
To microscopic depths: he would come back,
And say, _There is no God;_ and sit and weep;
Till in his heart a child's voice woke and cried,
_Father! my Father!_ Then the face of God
Breaks forth with eyes, everywhere, suddenly
And not a space of blue, nor floating cloud,
Nor grassy vale, nor distant purple height,
But, trembling with a presence all divine,
Says, _Here I am, my child._

                            Gazing awhile,
They let the lesson of the sky sink deep
Into their hearts; withdrawing then their eyes,
They knew the Earth again. And as they went,
Oft in the changing heavens, those distant hills
Shone clear upon the horizon. Then awoke
A strange and unknown longing in their souls,
As if for something loved in years gone by,
And vanished in its beauty and its love
So long, that it retained no name or form,
And lay on childhood's verge, all but forgot,
Wrapt in the enchanted rose-mists of that land:
As if amidst those hills were wooded dells,
Summer, and gentle winds, and odours free,
Deep sleeping waters, gorgeous flowers, and birds,
Pure winged throats. But here, all things around
Were in their spring. The very light that lay
Upon the grass seemed new-born like the grass,
Sprung with it from the earth. The very stones
Looked warm. The brown ploughed earth seemed swelling up,
Filled like a sponge with sunbeams, which lay still,
Nestling unseen, and broodingly, and warm,
In every little nest, corner, or crack,
Wherein might hide a blind and sleepy seed,
Waiting the touch of penetrative life
To wake, and grow, and beautify the earth.
The mossy stems and boughs, where yet no life
Exuberant overflowed in buds and leaves,
Were clothed in golden splendours, interwoven
With many shadows from the branches bare.
And through their tops the west wind rushing went,
Calling aloud the sleeping sap within:
The thrill passed downwards from the roots in air
To the roots tremulous in the embracing ground.
And though no buds with little dots of light
Sparkled the darkness of the hedgerow twigs;
Softening, expanding in the warm light-bath,
Seemed the dry smoky bark.

                          Thus in the fields
They spent their holiday. And when the sun
Was near the going down, they turned them home
With strengthened hearts. For they were filled with light,
And with the spring; and, like the bees, went back
To their dark house, laden with blessed sights,
With gladsome sounds home to their treasure-cave;
Where henceforth sudden gleams of spring would pass
Thorough the four-walled darkness of the room;
And sounds of spring-time whisper trembling by,
Though stony streets with iron echoed round.
And as they crossed a field, they came by chance
Upon a place where once a home had been;
Fragments of ruined walls, half-overgrown
With moss, for even stones had their green robe.
It had been a small cottage, with a plot
Of garden-ground in front, mapped out with walks
Now scarce discernible, but that the grass
Was thinner, the ground harder to the foot:
The place was simply shadowed with an old
Almost erased human carefulness.
Close by the ruined wall, where once had been
The door dividing it from the great world,
Making it _home_, a single snowdrop grew.
'Twas the sole remnant of a family
Of flowers that in this garden once had dwelt,
Vanished with all their hues of glowing life,
Save one too white for death.

                             And as its form
Arose within the brain, a feeling sprung
Up in their souls, new, white, and delicate;
A waiting, longing, patient hopefulness,
The snowdrop of the heart. The heavenly child,
Pale with the earthly cold, hung its meek head,
Enduring all, and so victorious;
The Summer's earnest in the waking Earth,
The spirit's in the heart.

                          I love thee, flower,
With a love almost human, tenderly;
The Spring's first child, yea, thine, my hoping heart!
Upon thy inner leaves and in thy heart,
Enough of green to tell thou know'st the grass;
In thy white mind remembering lowly friends;
But most I love thee for that little stain
Of earth on thy transfigured radiancy,
Which thou hast lifted with thee from thy grave,
The soiling of thy garments on thy road,
Travelling forth into the light and air,
The heaven of thy pure rest. Some gentle rain
Will surely wash thee white, and send the earth
Back to the place of earth; but now it signs
Thee child of earth, of human birth as we.

With careful hands uprooting it, they bore
The little plant a willing captive home;
Willing to enter dark abodes, secure
In its own tale of light. As once of old,
Bearing all heaven in words of promising,
The Angel of the Annunciation came,
It carried all the spring into that house;
A pot of mould its only tie to Earth,
Its heaven an ell of blue 'twixt chimney-tops,
Its world henceforth that little, low-ceiled room,
Symbol and child of spring, it took its place
'Midst all those types, to be a type with them,
Of what so many feel, not knowing it;
The hidden springtime that is drawing nigh.
And henceforth, when the shadow of the cross
Will enter, clothed in moonlight, still and dark,
The flower will nestle at its foot till day,
Pale, drooping, heart-content.

                              To rest they went.
And all night long the snowdrop glimmered white
Amid the dark, unconscious and unseen.

Before the sun had crowned his eastern hill
With its world-diadem, they woke.

                                 I looked
Out of the windows of the inner dream,
And saw the edge of the sun's glory rise
Eastward behind the hills, the lake-cup's rim.
And as it came, it sucked up in itself,
As deeds drink words, or daylight candle-flame,
That other sun rising to light the dream.
They lay awake and thoughtful, comforted
With yesterday which nested in their hearts,
Yet haunted with the sound of grinding wheels.


THE OUTER DREAM.

And as they lay and looked into the room,
It wavered, changed, dissolved beneath the sun,
Which mingled both the mornings in their eyes,
Till the true conquered, and the unreal passed.
No walls, but woods bathed in a level sun;
No ceiling, but the vestal sky of morn;
No bed, but flowers floating 'mid floating leaves
On water which grew audible as they stirred
And lifted up their heads. And a low wind
That flowed from out the west, washed from their eye
The last films of the dream. And they sat up,
Silent for one long cool delicious breath,
Gazing upon each other lost and found,
With a dumb ecstasy, new, undefined.
Followed a long embrace, and then the oars
Broke up their prison-bands.

                            And through the woods
They slowly went, beneath a firmament
Of boughs, and clouded leaves, filmy and pale
In the sunshine, but shadowy on the grass.
And roving odours met them on their way,
Sun-quickened odours, which the fog had slain.
And their green sky had many a blossom-moon,
And constellations thick with starry flowers.
And deep and still were all the woods, except
For the Memnonian, glory-stricken birds;
And golden beetles 'mid the shadowy roots,
Green goblins of the grass, and mining mice;
And on the leaves the fairy butterflies,
Or doubting in the air, scarlet and blue.
The divine depth of summer clasped the Earth.

But 'twixt their hearts and summer's perfectness
Came a dividing thought that seemed to say:
"_Ye wear strange looks._" Did summer speak, or they?
They said within: "We know that ye are fair,
Bright flowers; but ye shine far away, as in
A land of other thoughts. Alas! alas!

"Where shall we find the snowdrop-bell half-blown?
What shall we do? we feel the throbbing spring
Bursting in new and unexpressive thoughts;
Our hearts are swelling like a tied-up bud,
And summer crushes them with too much light.
Action is bubbling up within our souls;
The woods oppress us more than stony streets;
That was the life indeed; this is the dream;
Summer is too complete for growing hearts;
They need a broken season, and a land
With shadows pointing ever far away;
Where incompleteness rouses longing thoughts
With spires abrupt, and broken spheres, and circles
Cut that they may be widened evermore:
Through shattered cloudy roof, looks in the sky,
A discord from a loftier harmony;
And tempests waken peace within our thoughts,
Driving them inward to the inmost rest.
Come, my beloved, we will haste and go
To those pale faces of our fellow men;
Our loving hearts, burning with summer-fire,
Will cast a glow upon their pallidness;
Our hands will help them, far as servants may;
Hands are apostles still to saviour-hearts.
So we may share their blessedness with them;
So may the snowdrop time be likewise ours;
And Earth smile tearfully the spirit smile
Wherewith she smiled upon our holiday,
As a sweet child may laugh with weeping eyes.
If ever we return, these glorious flowers
May all be snowdrops of a higher spring."
Their eyes one moment met, and then they knew
That they did mean the same thing in their hearts.
So with no farther words they turned and went
Back to the boat, and so across the mere.

I wake from out my dream, and know my room,
My darling books, the cherub forms above;
I know 'tis springtime in the world without;
I feel it springtime in my world within;
I know that bending o'er an early flower,
Crocus, or primrose, or anemone,
The heart that striveth for a higher life,
And hath not yet been conquered, findeth there
A beauty deep, unshared by any rose,
A human loveliness about the flower;
That a heath-bell upon a lonely waste
Hath more than scarlet splendour on thick leaves;
That a blue opening 'midst rain-bosomed clouds
Is more than Paphian sun-set harmonies;
That higher beauty dwells on earth, because
Man seeks a higher home than Paradise;
And, having lost, is roused thereby to fill
A deeper need than could be filled by all
The lost ten times restored; and so he loves
The snowdrop more than the magnolia;
Spring-hope is more to him than summer-joy;
Dark towns than Eden-groves with rivers four.
		</article>
		<article id="after-an-old-legend" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">After an Old Legend</h2>
<p>The monk was praying in his cell,<br/>

  With bowed head praying sore;<br/>

He had been praying on his knees<br/>

  For two long hours and more.<br/>
</p>

<p>As of themselves, all suddenly,<br/>

  His eyelids opened wide;<br/>

Before him on the ground he saw<br/>

  A man's feet close beside;<br/>
</p>

<p>And almost to the feet came down<br/>

  A garment wove throughout;<br/>

Such garment he had never seen<br/>

  In countries round about!<br/>
</p>

<p>His eyes he lifted tremblingly<br/>

  Until a hand they spied:<br/>

A chisel-scar on it he saw,<br/>

  And a deep, torn scar beside.<br/>
</p>

<p>His eyes they leaped up to the face,<br/>

  His heart gave one wild bound,<br/>

Then stood as if its work were done—<br/>

  The Master he had found!<br/>
</p>

<p>With sudden clang the convent bell<br/>

  Told him the poor did wait<br/>

His hand to give the daily bread<br/>

  Doled at the convent-gate.<br/>
</p>

<p>Then Love rose in him passionate,<br/>

  And with Duty wrestled strong;<br/>

And the bell kept calling all the time<br/>

  With merciless iron tongue.<br/>
</p>

<p>The Master stood and looked at him<br/>

  He rose up with a sigh:<br/>

"He will be gone when I come back<br/>

  I go to him by and by!"<br/>
</p>

<p>He chid his heart, he fed the poor<br/>

  All at the convent-gate;<br/>

Then with slow-dragging feet went back<br/>

  To his cell so desolate:<br/>
</p>

<p>His heart bereaved by duty done,<br/>

  He had sore need of prayer!<br/>

Oh, sad he lifted the latch!—and, lo,<br/>

  The Master standing there!<br/>
</p>

<p>He said, "My poor had not to stand<br/>

  Wearily at thy gate:<br/>

For him who feeds the shepherd's sheep<br/>

  The shepherd will stand and wait."<br/>
</p>

<p>_Yet, Lord—for thou would'st have us judge,<br/>

  And I will humbly dare—<br/>

If he had staid, I do not think<br/>

  Thou wouldst have left him there.<br/>
</p>

<p>Thy voice in far-off time I hear,<br/>

  With sweet defending, say:<br/>

"The poor ye always have with you,<br/>

  Me ye have not alway!"<br/>
</p>

<p>Thou wouldst have said: "Go feed my poor,<br/>

  The deed thou shalt not rue;<br/>

Wherever ye do my father's will<br/>

  I always am with you."_<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-trees-prayer" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Tree's Prayer</h2>
<p>Alas, 'tis cold and dark!<br/>

The wind all night hath sung a wintry tune!<br/>

Hail from black clouds that swallowed up the moon<br/>

Beat, beat against my bark.<br/>
</p>

<p>Oh! why delays the spring?<br/>

Not yet the sap moves in my frozen veins;<br/>

Through all my stiffened roots creep numbing pains,<br/>

That I can hardly cling.<br/>
</p>

<p>The sun shone yester-morn;<br/>

I felt the glow down every fibre float,<br/>

And thought I heard a thrush's piping note<br/>

Of dim dream-gladness born.<br/>
</p>

<p>Then, on the salt gale driven,<br/>

The streaming cloud hissed through my outstretched arms,<br/>

Tossed me about in slanting snowy swarms,<br/>

And blotted out the heaven.<br/>
</p>

<p>All night I brood and choose<br/>

Among past joys. Oh, for the breath of June!<br/>

The feathery light-flakes quavering from the moon<br/>

The slow baptizing dews!<br/>
</p>

<p>Oh, the joy-frantic birds!—<br/>

They are the tongues of us, mute, longing trees!<br/>

Aha, the billowy odours! and the bees<br/>

That browse like scattered herds!<br/>
</p>

<p>The comfort-whispering showers<br/>

That thrill with gratefulness my youngest shoot!<br/>

The children playing round my deep-sunk root,<br/>

Green-caved from burning hours!<br/>
</p>

<p>See, see the heartless dawn,<br/>

With naked, chilly arms latticed across!<br/>

Another weary day of moaning loss<br/>

On the thin-shadowed lawn!<br/>
</p>

<p>But icy winter's past;<br/>

Yea, climbing suns persuade the relenting wind:<br/>

I will endure with steadfast, patient mind;<br/>

My leaves <i>will</i> come at last!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-story-of-the-sea-shore" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Story of the Sea-Shore</h2>
<h4>TO THEM THAT MOURN.</h4>

<p>  Let your tears flow; let your sad sighs have scope;<br/>

  Only take heed they fan, they water Hope.<br/>
</p>

<h2>A STORY OF THE SEA-SHORE.</h2>

<h5>INTRODUCTION.</h5>

<p>  I sought the long clear twilights of my home,<br/>

  Far in the pale-blue skies and slaty seas,<br/>

  What time the sunset dies not utterly,<br/>

  But withered to a ghost-like stealthy gleam,<br/>

  Round the horizon creeps the short-lived night,<br/>

  And changes into sunrise in a swoon.<br/>

  I found my home in homeliness unchanged:<br/>

  The love that made it home, unchangeable,<br/>

  Received me as a child, and all was well.<br/>

  My ancient summer-heaven, borne on the hills,<br/>

  Once more embraced me; and once more the vale,<br/>

  So often sighed for in the far-off nights,<br/>

  Rose on my bodily vision, and, behold,<br/>

  In nothing had the fancy mocked the fact!<br/>

  The hasting streams went garrulous as of old;<br/>

  The resting flowers in silence uttered more;<br/>

  The blue hills rose and dwelt alone in heaven;<br/>

  Householding Nature from her treasures brought<br/>

  Things old and new, the same yet not the same,<br/>

  For all was holier, lovelier than before;<br/>

  And best of all, once more I paced the fields<br/>

  With him whose love had made me long for God<br/>

  So good a father that, needs-must, I sought<br/>

  A better still, Father of him and me.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Once on a day, my cousin Frank and I<br/>

  Sat swiftly borne behind the dear white mare<br/>

  That oft had carried me in bygone days<br/>

  Along the lonely paths of moorland hills;<br/>

  But now we sought the coast, where deep waves foam<br/>

  'Gainst rocks that lift their dark fronts to the north.<br/>

  And with us went a girl, on whose kind face<br/>

  I had not looked for many a youthful year,<br/>

  But the old friendship straightway blossomed new.<br/>

  The heavens were sunny, and the earth was green;<br/>

  The large harebells in families stood along<br/>

  The grassy borders, of a tender blue<br/>

  Transparent as the sky, haunted with wings<br/>

  Of many butterflies, as blue as they.<br/>

  And as we talked and talked without restraint,<br/>

  Brought near by memories of days that were,<br/>

  And therefore are for ever; by the joy<br/>

  Of motion through a warm and shining air;<br/>

  By the glad sense of freedom and like thoughts;<br/>

  And by the bond of friendship with the dead,<br/>

  She told the tale which here I tell again.<br/>
</p>

<p>  I had returned to childish olden time,<br/>

  And asked her if she knew a castle worn,<br/>

  Whose masonry, razed utterly above,<br/>

  Yet faced the sea-cliff up, and met the waves:—<br/>

  'Twas one of my child-marvels; for, each year,<br/>

  We turned our backs upon the ripening corn,<br/>

  And sought some village on the Moray shore;<br/>

  And nigh this ruin, was that I loved the best.<br/>
</p>

<p>  For oh the riches of that little port!—<br/>

  Down almost to the beach, where a high wall<br/>

  Inclosed them, came the gardens of a lord,<br/>

  Free to the visitor with foot restrained—<br/>

  His shady walks, his ancient trees of state;<br/>

  His river—that would not be shut within,<br/>

  But came abroad, went dreaming o'er the sands,<br/>

  And lost itself in finding out the sea;<br/>

  Inside, it bore grave swans, white splendours—crept<br/>

  Under the fairy leap of a wire bridge,<br/>

  Vanished in leaves, and came again where lawns<br/>

  Lay verdurous, and the peacock's plumy heaven<br/>

  Bore azure suns with green and golden rays.<br/>

  It was my childish Eden; for the skies<br/>

  Were loftier in that garden, and the clouds<br/>

  More summer-gracious, edged with broader white;<br/>

  And when they rained, it was a golden rain<br/>

  That sparkled as it fell—an odorous rain.<br/>

  And then its wonder-heart!—a little room,<br/>

  Half-hollowed in the side of a steep hill,<br/>

  Which rose, with columned, windy temple crowned,<br/>

  A landmark to far seas. The enchanted cell<br/>

  Was clouded over in the gentle night<br/>

  Of a luxuriant foliage, and its door,<br/>

  Half-filled with rainbow hues of coloured glass,<br/>

  Opened into the bosom of the hill.<br/>

  Never to sesame of mine that door<br/>

  Gave up its sanctuary; but through the glass,<br/>

  Gazing with reverent curiosity,<br/>

  I saw a little chamber, round and high,<br/>

  Which but to see was to escape the heat,<br/>

  And bathe in coolness of the eye and brain;<br/>

  For all was dusky greenness; on one side,<br/>

  A window, half-blind with ivy manifold,<br/>

  Whose leaves, like heads of gazers, climbed to the top,<br/>

  Gave a joy-saddened light, for all that came<br/>

  Through the thick veil was green, oh, kindest hue!<br/>

  But the heart has a heart—this heart had one:<br/>

  Still in the midst, the <i>ever more</i> of all,<br/>

  On a low column stood, white, cold, dim-clear,<br/>

  A marble woman. Who she was I know not—<br/>

  A Psyche, or a Silence, or an Echo:<br/>

  Pale, undefined, a silvery shadow, still,<br/>

  In one lone chamber of my memory,<br/>

  She is a power upon me as of old.<br/>
</p>

<p>  But, ah, to dream there through hot summer days,<br/>

  In coolness shrouded and sea-murmurings,<br/>

  Forgot by all till twilight shades grew dark!<br/>

  To find half-hidden in the hollowed wall,<br/>

  A nest of tales, old volumes such as dreams<br/>

  Hoard up in bookshops dim in tortuous streets!<br/>

  That wondrous marble woman evermore<br/>

  Filling the gloom with calm delirium<br/>

  Of radiated whiteness, as I read!—<br/>

  The fancied joy, too plenteous for its cup,<br/>

  O'erflowed, and turned to sadness as it fell.<br/>
</p>

<p>  But the gray ruin on the shattered shore,<br/>

  Not the green refuge in the bowering hill,<br/>

  Drew forth our talk that day. For, as I said,<br/>

  I asked her if she knew it. She replied,<br/>

  "I know it well. A woman used to live<br/>

  In one of its low vaults, my mother says."<br/>

  "I found a hole," I said, "and spiral stair,<br/>

  Leading from level of the ground above<br/>

  To a low-vaulted room within the rock,<br/>

  Whence through a small square window I looked forth<br/>

  Wide o'er the waters; the dim-sounding waves<br/>

  Were many feet below, and shrunk in size<br/>

  To a great ripple." "'Twas not there," she said,<br/>

  "—Not in that room half up the cliff, but one<br/>

  Low down, within the margin of spring tides:<br/>

  When both the tide and northern wind are high,<br/>

  'Tis more an ocean-cave than castle-vault."<br/>

  And then she told me all she knew of her.<br/>
</p>

<p>  It was a simple tale, a monotone:<br/>

  She climbed one sunny hill, gazed once abroad,<br/>

  Then wandered down, to pace a dreary plain;<br/>

  Alas! how many such are told by night,<br/>

  In fisher-cottages along the shore!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Farewell, old summer-day! I turn aside<br/>

  To tell her story, interwoven with thoughts<br/>

  Born of its sorrow; for I dare not think<br/>

  A woman at the mercy of a sea.<br/>
</p>

<h3>                   THE STORY.</h3>

<p>  Aye as it listeth blows the listless wind,<br/>

  Swelling great sails, and bending lordly masts,<br/>

  Or hurrying shadow-waves o'er fields of corn,<br/>

  And hunting lazy clouds across the sky:<br/>

  Now, like a white cloud o'er another sky,<br/>

  It blows a tall brig from the harbour's mouth,<br/>

  Away to high-tossed heads of wallowing waves,<br/>

  'Mid hoverings of long-pinioned arrowy birds.<br/>

  With clouds and birds and sails and broken crests,<br/>

  All space is full of spots of fluttering white,<br/>

  And yet the sailor knows that handkerchief<br/>

  Waved wet with tears, and heavy in the wind.<br/>

  Blow, wind! draw out the cord that binds the twain;<br/>

  Draw, for thou canst not break the lengthening cord.<br/>

  Blow, wind! yet gently; gently blow, fair wind!<br/>

  And let love's vision slowly, gently die;<br/>

  Let the bright sails all solemn-slowly pass,<br/>

  And linger ghost-like o'er the vanished hull,<br/>

  With a white farewell to her straining eyes;<br/>

  For never more in morning's level beams,<br/>

  Will those sea-shadowing sails, dark-stained and worn,<br/>

  From the gray-billowed north come dancing in;<br/>

  Oh, never, gliding home 'neath starry skies,<br/>

  Over the dusk of the dim-glancing sea,<br/>

  Will the great ship send forth a herald cry<br/>

  Of home-come sailors, into sleeping streets!<br/>

  Blow gently, wind! blow slowly, gentle wind!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Weep not yet, maiden; 'tis not yet thy hour.<br/>

  Why shouldst thou weep before thy time is come?<br/>

  Go to thy work; break into song sometimes—<br/>

  Song dying slow-forgotten, in the lapse<br/>

  Of dreamy thought, ere natural pause ensue,<br/>

  Or sudden dropt what time the eager heart<br/>

  Hurries the ready eye to north and east.<br/>

  Sing, maiden, while thou canst, ere yet the truth,<br/>

  Slow darkening, choke the heart-caged singing bird!<br/>
</p>

<p>  The weeks went by. Oft leaving household work,<br/>

  With bare arms and uncovered head she clomb<br/>

  The landward slope of the prophetic hill;<br/>

  From whose green head, as from the verge of time,<br/>

  Far out on the eternity of blue,<br/>

  Shading her hope-rapt eyes, seer-like she gazed,<br/>

  If from the Hades of the nether world,<br/>

  Slow climbing up the round side of the earth,<br/>

  Haply her prayers were drawing his tardy sails<br/>

  Over the threshold of the far sky-sea—<br/>

  Drawing her sailor home to celebrate,<br/>

  With holy rites of family and church,<br/>

  The apotheosis of maidenhood.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Months passed; he came not; and a shadowy fear,<br/>

  Long haunting the horizon of her soul,<br/>

  In deeper gloom and sharper form drew nigh;<br/>

  And growing in bulk, possessed her atmosphere,<br/>

  And lost all shape, because it filled all space,<br/>

  And reached beyond the bounds of consciousness—<br/>

  In sudden incarnations darting swift<br/>

  From out its infinite a gulfy stare<br/>

  Of terror blank, of hideous emptiness,<br/>

  Of widowhood ere ever wedding-day.<br/>
</p>

<p>  On granite ridge, and chalky cliff, and pier,<br/>

  Far built into the waves along our shores,<br/>

  Maidens have stood since ever ships went forth;<br/>

  The same pain at the heart; the same slow mist<br/>

  Clouding the eye; the same fixed longing look,<br/>

  As if the soul had gone, and left the door<br/>

  Wide open—gone to lean, hearken, and peer<br/>

  Over the awful edge where voidness sinks<br/>

  Sheer to oblivion—that horizon-line<br/>

  Over whose edge he vanished—came no more.<br/>

  O God, why are our souls, waste, helpless seas,<br/>

  Tortured with such immitigable storm?<br/>

  What is this love, that now on angel wing<br/>

  Sweeps us amid the stars in passionate calm;<br/>

  And now with demon arms fast cincturing,<br/>

  Drops us, through all gyrations of keen pain,<br/>

  Down the black vortex, till the giddy whirl<br/>

  Gives fainting respite to the ghastly brain?<br/>

  O happy they for whom the Possible<br/>

  Opens its gates of madness, and becomes<br/>

  The Real around them!—such to whom henceforth<br/>

  There is but one to-morrow, the next morn,<br/>

  Their wedding-day, ever one step removed,<br/>

  The husband's foot ever upon the verge<br/>

  Of the day's threshold, in a lasting dream!<br/>

  Such madness may be but a formless faith—<br/>

  A chaos which the breath of God will blow<br/>

  Into an ordered world of seed and fruit.<br/>

  Shall not the Possible become the Real?<br/>

  God sleeps not when he makes his daughters dream.<br/>

  Shall not the morrow dawn at last which leads<br/>

  The maiden-ghost, confused and half awake,<br/>

  Into the land whose shadows are our dreams?—<br/>

  Thus questioning we stand upon the shore,<br/>

  And gaze across into the Unrevealed.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Upon its visible symbol gazed the girl,<br/>

  Till earth behind her ceased, and sea was all,<br/>

  Possessing eyes and brain and shrinking soul—<br/>

  A universal mouth to swallow up,<br/>

  And close eternally in one blue smile!<br/>

  A still monotony of pauseless greed,<br/>

  Its only voice an endless, dreary song<br/>

  Of wailing, and of craving from the world!<br/>
</p>

<p>  A low dull dirge that ever rose and died,<br/>

  Recurring without pause or change or close,<br/>

  Like one verse chaunted ever in sleepless brain,<br/>

  Still drew her to the shore. It drew her down,<br/>

  Like witch's spell, that fearful endless moan;<br/>

  Somewhere, she thought, in the green abyss below,<br/>

  His body, at the centre of the moan,<br/>

  Obeyed the motions whence the moaning grew;<br/>

  Now, now, in circle slow revolved, and now<br/>

  Swayed like a wind-swung bell, now swept along<br/>

  Hither and thither, idly to and fro,<br/>

  Heedlessly wandering through the heedless sea.<br/>

  Its fascination drew her onward still—<br/>

  On to the ridgy rocks that seaward ran,<br/>

  And out along their furrows and jagged backs,<br/>

  To the last lonely point where the green mass<br/>

  Arose and sank, heaved slow and forceful. There<br/>

  She shuddered and recoiled. Thus, for a time,<br/>

  Sport-slave of power occult, she came and went,<br/>

  Betwixt the shore and sea alternating,<br/>

  Drawn ever to the greedy lapping lip,<br/>

  Then, terror-stung, driven backward: there it lay,<br/>

  The heartless, cruel, miserable deep,<br/>

  Ambushed in horror, with its glittering eye<br/>

  Still drawing her to its green gulfing maw!<br/>
</p>

<p>  But every ocean hath its isles, each woe<br/>

  Its scattered comfortings; and this was one<br/>

  That often came to her—that she, wave-caught,<br/>

  Must, in the wash of ever-shifting waters,<br/>

  In some good hour sure-fixed of pitiful fate,<br/>

  <i>All-conscious still of love, despite the sea</i>,<br/>

  Float over some stray bone, some particle,<br/>

  Which far-diffused sense would know as his:<br/>

  Heart-glad she would sit down, and watch the tide<br/>

  Slow-growing—till it reached at length her feet,<br/>

  When, at its first cold touch, up she would spring,<br/>

  And, ghastful, flee, with white-rimmed sightless eye.<br/>
</p>

<p>  But still, where'er she fled, the sea-voice followed;<br/>

  Whisperings innumerable of water-drops<br/>

  Would grow together to a giant cry;<br/>

  Now hoarse, half-stifled, pleading, warning tones,<br/>

  Now thunderous peals of billowy, wrathful shouts,<br/>

  Called after her to come, and make no pause.<br/>

  From the loose clouds that mingled with the spray,<br/>

  And from the tossings of the lifted seas,<br/>

  Where plunged and rose the raving wilderness,<br/>

  Outreaching arms, pursuing, beckoning hands,<br/>

  Came shoreward, lengthening, feeling after her.<br/>

  Then would she fling her own wild arms on high,<br/>

  Over her head, in tossings like the waves,<br/>

  Or fix them, with clasped hands of prayer intense,<br/>

  Forward, appealing to the bitter sea.<br/>

  Sometimes she sudden from her shoulders tore<br/>

  Her garments, one by one, and cast them out<br/>

  Into the roarings of the heedless surge,<br/>

  In vain oblation to the hungry waves.<br/>

  As vain was Pity's will to cover her;<br/>

  Best gifts but bribed the sea, and left her bare.<br/>

  In her poor heart and brain burned such a fire<br/>

  That all-unheeded cold winds lapped her round,<br/>

  And sleet-like spray flashed on her tawny skin.<br/>

  Her food she seldom ate; her naked arms<br/>

  Flung it far out to feed the sea; her hair<br/>

  Streamed after it, like rooted ocean-weed<br/>

  In headlong current. But, alas, the sea<br/>

  Took it, and came again—it would have <i>her</i>!<br/>

  And as the wave importunate, so despair,<br/>

  Back surging, on her heart rushed ever afresh:<br/>

  Sickening she moaned—half muttered and half moaned—<br/>

  "She winna be content; she'll hae mysel!"<br/>
</p>

<p>  But when the night grew thick upon the sea,<br/>

  Quenching it almost, save its quenchless voice,<br/>

  Then, half-released until the light, she rose,<br/>

  And step by step withdrew—as dreaming man,<br/>

  With an eternity of slowness, drags<br/>

  His earth-bound, lead-like, irresponsive feet<br/>

  Back from a sleeping horror, she withdrew.<br/>

  But when, upon the narrow beach at last,<br/>

  She turned her back upon her hidden foe,<br/>

  It blended with her phantom-breeding brain,<br/>

  And, scared at very fear, she cried and fled—<br/>

  Fled to the battered base of the old tower,<br/>

  And round the rock, and through the arched gap<br/>

  Into the yawning blackness of the vault—<br/>

  There sank upon the sand, and gasped, and raved.<br/>

  Close cowering in a nook, she sat all night,<br/>

  Her face turned to the entrance of the vault,<br/>

  Through which a pale light shimmered—from the eye<br/>

  Of the great sleepless ocean—Argus more dread<br/>

  Than he with hundred lidless watching orbs,<br/>

  And slept, and dreamed, and dreaming saw the sea.<br/>

  But in the stormy nights, when all was dark,<br/>

  And the wild tempest swept with slanting wing<br/>

  Against her refuge, and the heavy spray<br/>

  Shot through the doorway serpentine cold arms<br/>

  To seize the fore-doomed morsel of the sea,<br/>

  She slept not, evermore stung to new life<br/>

  By new sea-terrors. Now it was the gull:<br/>

  His clanging pinions darted through the arch,<br/>

  And flapped about her head; now 'twas a wave<br/>

  Grown arrogant: it rushed into her house,<br/>

  Clasped her waist-high, then out again and away<br/>

  To swell the devilish laughter in the fog,<br/>

  And leave her clinging to the rocky wall,<br/>

  With white face watching. When it came no more,<br/>

  And the tide ebbed, not yet she slept—sat down,<br/>

  And sat unmoving, till the low gray dawn<br/>

  Grew on the misty dance of spouting waves,<br/>

  That made a picture in the rugged arch;<br/>

  Then the old fascination woke and drew;<br/>

  And, rising slowly, forth she went afresh,<br/>

  To haunt the border of the dawning sea.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Yet all the time there lay within her soul<br/>

  An inner chamber, quietest place; but she<br/>

  Turned from its door, and staid out in the storm.<br/>

  She, entering there, had found a refuge calm<br/>

  As summer evening, as a mother's arms.<br/>

  There had she found her lost love, only lost<br/>

  In that he slept, and she was still awake.<br/>

  There she had found, waiting for her to come,<br/>

  The Love that waits and watches evermore.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Thou too hast such a chamber, quietest place,<br/>

  Where that Love waits for thee. What is it, say,<br/>

  That will not let thee enter? Is it care<br/>

  For the provision of the unborn day,<br/>

  As if thou wert a God that must foresee?<br/>

  Is it poor hunger for the praise of men?<br/>

  Is it ambition to outstrip thy fellow<br/>

  In this world's race? Or is it love of self—<br/>

  That greed which still to have must still destroy?—<br/>

  Go mad for some lost love; some voice of old,<br/>

  Which first thou madest sing, and after sob;<br/>

  Some heart thou foundest rich, and leftest bare,<br/>

  Choking its well of faith with thy false deeds—<br/>

  Unlike thy God, who keeps the better wine<br/>

  Until the last, and, if he giveth grief,<br/>

  Giveth it first, and ends the tale with joy:<br/>

  Such madness clings about the feet of God,<br/>

  Nor lets them go. Better a thousandfold<br/>

  Be she than thou! for though thy brain be strong<br/>

  And clear and workful, hers a withered flower<br/>

  That never came to seed, her heart is full<br/>

  Of that in whose live might God made the world;<br/>

  She is a well, and thou an empty cup.<br/>

  It was the invisible unbroken cord<br/>

  Between the twain, her and her sailor-lad,<br/>

  That drew her ever to the ocean marge.<br/>

  Better to die for love, to rave for love,<br/>

  Than not to love at all! but to have loved,<br/>

  And, loved again, then to have turned away—<br/>

  Better than that, never to have been born!<br/>
</p>

<p>  But if thy heart be noble, say if thou<br/>

  Canst ever all forget an hour of pain,<br/>

  When, maddened with the thought that could not be,<br/>

  Thou might'st have yielded to the demon wind<br/>

  That swept in tempest through thy scorching brain,<br/>

  And rushed into the night, and howled aloud,<br/>

  And clamoured to the waves, and beat the rocks;<br/>

  And never found thy way back to the seat<br/>

  Of conscious self, and power to rule thy pain,<br/>

  Had not God made thee strong to bear and live!<br/>

  The tale is now in thee, not thou in it;<br/>

  But the sad woman, in her wildest mood,<br/>

  Thou knowest her thy sister! She is fair<br/>

  No more; her eyes like fierce suns blaze and burn;<br/>

  Her cheeks are parched and brown; her haggard form<br/>

  Is wasted by wild storms of soul and sea;<br/>

  Yet in her very self is that which still<br/>

  Reminds thee of a story, old, not dead,<br/>

  Which God has in his keeping—of thyself.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Ah, not forgot are children when they sleep!<br/>

  The darkness lasts all night, and clears the eyes;<br/>

  Then comes the morning with the joy of light.<br/>

  Oh, surely madness hideth not from Him!<br/>

  Nor doth a soul cease to be beautiful<br/>

  In his sight, that its beauty is withdrawn,<br/>

  And hid by pale eclipse from human eyes.<br/>

  As the chill snow is friendly to the earth,<br/>

  And pain and loss are friendly to the soul,<br/>

  Shielding it from the black heart-killing frost;<br/>

  So madness is but one of God's pale winters;<br/>

  And when the winter over is and gone,<br/>

  Then smile the skies, then blooms the earth again,<br/>

  And the fair time of singing birds is come:<br/>

  Into the cold wind and the howling night,<br/>

  God sent for her, and she was carried in<br/>

  Where there was no more sea.<br/>
</p>

<p>                              What messenger<br/>

  Ran from the door of heaven to bring her home?<br/>

  The sea, her terror.<br/>
</p>

<p>                      In the rocks that stand<br/>

  Below the cliff, there lies a rounded hollow,<br/>

  Scooped like a basin, with jagged and pinnacled sides:<br/>

  Low buried when the wind heaps up the surge,<br/>

  It lifts in the respiration of the tide<br/>

  Its broken edges, and, then, deep within<br/>

  Lies resting water, radiantly clear:<br/>

  There, on a morn of sunshine, while the wind<br/>

  Yet blew, and heaved yet the billowy sea<br/>

  With memories of a night of stormy dreams,<br/>

  At rest they found her: in the sleep which is<br/>

  And is not death, she, lying very still,<br/>

  Absorbed the bliss that follows after pain.<br/>

  O life of love, conquered at last by fate!<br/>

  O life raised from the dead by saviour Death!<br/>

  O love unconquered and invincible!<br/>

  The enemy sea had cooled her burning brain;<br/>

  Had laid to rest the heart that could not rest;<br/>

  Had hid the horror of its own dread face!<br/>

  'Twas but one desolate cry, and then her fear<br/>

  Became a blessed fact, and straight she knew<br/>

  What God knew all the time—that it was well.<br/>
</p>

<p>  O thou whose feet tread ever the wet sands<br/>

  And howling rocks along the wearing shore,<br/>

  Roaming the borders of the sea of death!<br/>

  Strain not thine eyes, bedimmed with longing tears,<br/>

  No sail comes climbing back across that line.<br/>

  Turn thee, and to thy work; let God alone,<br/>

  And wait for him: faint o'er the waves will come<br/>

  Far-floating whispers from the other shore<br/>

  To thine averted ears. Do thou thy work,<br/>

  And thou shalt follow—follow, and find thine own.<br/>
</p>

<p>  And thou who fearest something that may come;<br/>

  Around whose house the storm of terror breaks<br/>

  All night; to whose love-sharpened ear, all day,<br/>

  The Invisible is calling at the door,<br/>

  To render up a life thou canst not keep,<br/>

  Or love that will not stay,—open thy door,<br/>

  And carry out thy dying to the marge<br/>

  Of the great sea; yea, walk into the flood,<br/>

  And lay thy dead upon the moaning waves.<br/>

  Give them to God to bury; float them again,<br/>

  With sighs and prayers to waft them through the gloom,<br/>

  Back to the spring of life. Say—"If they die,<br/>

  Thou, the one life of life, art still alive,<br/>

  And thou canst make thy dead alive again!"<br/>
</p>

<p>  Ah God, the earth is full of cries and moans,<br/>

  And dull despair, that neither moans nor cries;<br/>

  Thousands of hearts are waiting helplessly;<br/>

  The whole creation groaneth, travaileth<br/>

  For what it knows not—with a formless hope<br/>

  Of resurrection or of dreamless death!<br/>

  Raise thou the dead; restore the Aprils withered<br/>

  In hearts of maidens; give their manhood back<br/>

  To old men feebly mournful o'er a life<br/>

  That scarce hath memory but the mournfulness!<br/>

  There is no past with thee: bring back once more<br/>

  The summer eves of lovers, over which<br/>

  The wintry wind that raveth through the world<br/>

  Heaps wretched leaves in gusts of ghastly snow;<br/>

  Bring back the mother-heaven of orphans lone,<br/>

  The brother's and the sister's faithfulness;—<br/>

  Bring in the kingdom of the Son of Man.<br/>
</p>

<p>  They troop around me, children wildly crying;<br/>

  Women with faded eyes, all spent of tears;<br/>

  Men who have lived for love, yet lived alone;<br/>

  Yea, some consuming in cold fires of shame!<br/>

  O God, thou hast a work for all thy strength<br/>

  In saving these thy hearts with full content—<br/>

  Except thou give them Lethe's stream to drink,<br/>

  And that, my God, were all unworthy thee!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Dome up, O heaven, yet higher o'er my head!<br/>

  Back, back, horizon; widen out my world!<br/>

  Rush in, O fathomless sea of the Unknown!<br/>

  For, though he slay me, I will trust in God.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="my-heart" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">My Heart</h2>
<h5>  I.</h5>

<p>  Night, with her power to silence day,<br/>

      Filled up my lonely room,<br/>

  Quenching all sounds but one that lay<br/>

      Beyond her passing doom,<br/>

  Where in his shed a workman gay<br/>

      Went on despite the gloom.<br/>
</p>

<p>  I listened, and I knew the sound,<br/>

      And the trade that he was plying;<br/>

  For backwards, forwards, bound on bound,<br/>

      A shuttle was flying, flying—<br/>

  Weaving ever—till, all unwound,<br/>

      The weft go out a sighing.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  II.</h4>

<p>  As hidden in thy chamber lowest<br/>

      As in the sky the lark,<br/>

  Thou, mystic thing, on working goest<br/>

      Without the poorest spark,<br/>

  And yet light's garment round me throwest,<br/>

      Who else, as thou, were dark.<br/>
</p>

<p>  With body ever clothing me,<br/>

      Thou mak'st me child of light;<br/>

  I look, and, Lo, the earth and sea,<br/>

      The sky's rejoicing height,<br/>

  A woven glory, globed by thee,<br/>

      Unknowing of thy might!<br/>
</p>

<p>  And when thy darkling labours fail,<br/>

      And thy shuttle moveless lies,<br/>

  My world will drop, like untied veil<br/>

      From before a lady's eyes;<br/>

  Or, all night read, a finished tale<br/>

      That in the morning dies.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  III.</h4>

<p>  Yet not in vain dost thou unroll<br/>

      The stars, the world, the seas—<br/>

  A mighty, wonder-painted scroll<br/>

      Of Patmos mysteries,<br/>

  Thou mediator 'twixt my soul<br/>

      And higher things than these!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Thy holy ephod bound on me,<br/>

      I pass into a seer;<br/>

  For still in things thou mak'st me see,<br/>

      The unseen grows more clear;<br/>

  Still their indwelling Deity<br/>

      Speaks plainer in mine ear.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Divinely taught the craftsman is<br/>

      Who waketh wonderings;<br/>

  Whose web, the nursing chrysalis<br/>

      Round Psyche's folded wings,<br/>

  To them transfers the loveliness<br/>

      Of its inwoven things.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Yet joy when thou shalt cease to beat!—<br/>

      For a greater heart beats on,<br/>

  Whose better texture follows fleet<br/>

      On thy last thread outrun,<br/>

  With a seamless-woven garment, meet<br/>

      To clothe a death-born son.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="o-do-not-leave-me" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">O Do Not Leave Me</h2>
<p>  O do not leave me, mother, lest I weep;<br/>

  Till I forget, be near me in that chair.<br/>

  The mother's presence leads her down to sleep—<br/>

  Leaves her contented there.<br/>
</p>

<p>  O do not leave me, lover, brother, friends,<br/>

  Till I am dead, and resting in my place.<br/>

  Love-compassed thus, the girl in peace ascends,<br/>

  And leaves a raptured face.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Leave me not, God, until—nay, until when?<br/>

  Not till I have with thee one heart, one mind;<br/>

  Not till the Life is Light in me, and then<br/>

  Leaving is left behind.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-flower-angels" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Flower-Angels</h2>
<p>  Of old, with goodwill from the skies—<br/>

    God's message to them given—<br/>

  The angels came, a glad surprise,<br/>

    And went again to heaven.<br/>
</p>

<p>  But now the angels are grown rare,<br/>

    Needed no more as then;<br/>

  Far lowlier messengers can bear<br/>

    God's goodwill unto men.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Each year, the snowdrops' pallid dawn<br/>

    Breaks from the earth below;<br/>

  Light spreads, till, from the dark updrawn,<br/>

    The noontide roses glow.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The snowdrops first—the dawning gray;<br/>

    Then out the roses burn!<br/>

  They speak their word, grow dim—away<br/>

    To holy dust return.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Of oracles were little dearth,<br/>

    Should heaven continue dumb;<br/>

  From lowliest corners of the earth<br/>

    God's messages will come.<br/>
</p>

<p>  In thy face his we see, O Lord,<br/>

    And are no longer blind;<br/>

  Need not so much his rarer word,<br/>

    In flowers even read his mind.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-my-sister" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To My Sister</h2>
<h5>   ON HER TWENTY-FIRST BIRTHDAY.</h5>

<h4>  I.</h4>

<p>  Old fables are not all a lie<br/>

    That tell of wondrous birth,<br/>

  Of Titan children, father Sky,<br/>

    And mighty mother Earth.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Yea, now are walking on the ground<br/>

    Sons of the mingled brood;<br/>

  Yea, now upon the earth are found<br/>

    Such daughters of the Good.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Earth-born, my sister, thou art still<br/>

    A daughter of the sky;<br/>

  Oh, climb for ever up the hill<br/>

    Of thy divinity!<br/>
</p>

<p>  To thee thy mother Earth is sweet,<br/>

    Her face to thee is fair;<br/>

  But thou, a goddess incomplete,<br/>

    Must climb the starry stair.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  II.</h4>

<p>  Wouldst thou the holy hill ascend,<br/>

    Wouldst see the Father's face?<br/>

  To all his other children bend,<br/>

    And take the lowest place.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Be like a cottage on a moor,<br/>

    A covert from the wind,<br/>

  With burning fire and open door,<br/>

    And welcome free and kind.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Thus humbly doing on the earth<br/>

    The things the earthly scorn,<br/>

  Thou shalt declare the lofty birth<br/>

    Of all the lowly born.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  III.</h4>

<p>  Be then thy sacred womanhood<br/>

    A sign upon thee set,<br/>

  A second baptism—understood—<br/>

    For what thou must be yet.<br/>
</p>

<p>  For, cause and end of all thy strife,<br/>

    And unrest as thou art,<br/>

  Still stings thee to a higher life<br/>

    The Father at thy heart.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="oh-thou-of-little-faith" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Oh Thou of Little Faith</h2>
<p>  Sad-hearted, be at peace: the snowdrop lies<br/>

    Buried in sepulchre of ghastly snow;<br/>

  But spring is floating up the southern skies,<br/>

    And darkling the pale snowdrop waits below.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Let me persuade: in dull December's day<br/>

    We scarce believe there is a month of June;<br/>

  But up the stairs of April and of May<br/>

    The hot sun climbeth to the summer's noon.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Yet hear me: I love God, and half I rest.<br/>

    O better! God loves thee, so all rest thou.<br/>

  He is our summer, our dim-visioned Best;—<br/>

    And in his heart thy prayer is resting now.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="longing-1" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Longing</h2>
<p>  My heart is full of inarticulate pain,<br/>

      And beats laborious. Cold ungenial looks<br/>

  Invade my sanctuary. Men of gain,<br/>

      Wise in success, well-read in feeble books,<br/>

  No nigher come, I pray: your air is drear;<br/>

  'Tis winter and low skies when ye appear.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Beloved, who love beauty and fair truth,<br/>

      Come nearer me; too near ye cannot come;<br/>

  Make me an atmosphere with your sweet youth;<br/>

      Give me your souls to breathe in, a large room;<br/>

  Speak not a word, for, see, my spirit lies<br/>

  Helpless and dumb; shine on me with your eyes.<br/>
</p>

<p>  O all wide places, far from feverous towns;<br/>

      Great shining seas; pine forests; mountains wild;<br/>

  Rock-bosomed shores; rough heaths, and sheep-cropt downs;<br/>

      Vast pallid clouds; blue spaces undefiled—<br/>

  Room! give me room! give loneliness and air—<br/>

  Free things and plenteous in your regions fair!<br/>
</p>

<p>  White dove of David, flying overhead,<br/>

      Golden with sunlight on thy snowy wings,<br/>

  Outspeeding thee my longing thoughts are fled<br/>

      To find a home afar from men of things;<br/>

  Where in his temple, earth o'erarched with sky,<br/>

  God's heart to mine may speak, my heart reply.<br/>
</p>

<p>  O God of mountains, stars, and boundless spaces,<br/>

      O God of freedom and of joyous hearts,<br/>

  When thy face looketh forth from all men's faces,<br/>

      There will be room enough in crowded marts!<br/>

  Brood thou around me, and the noise is o'er,<br/>

  Thy universe my closet with shut door.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Heart, heart, awake! The love that loveth all<br/>

      Maketh a deeper calm than Horeb's cave.<br/>

  God in thee, can his children's folly gall?<br/>

      Love may be hurt, but shall not love be brave?—<br/>

  Thy holy silence sinks in dews of balm;<br/>

  Thou art my solitude, my mountain-calm!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-disciple" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Disciple</h2>
<h3>DEDICATION.</h3>

<p>  To all who fain<br/>

  Would keep the grain,<br/>

        And cast the husk away—<br/>

  That it may feed<br/>

  The living seed,<br/>

        And serve it with decay—<br/>

  I offer this dim story<br/>

  Whose clouds crack into glory.<br/>
</p>

<h1>THE DISCIPLE.</h1>

<h5>I.</h5>

<p>  The times are changed, and gone the day<br/>

      When the high heavenly land,<br/>

  Though unbeheld, quite near them lay,<br/>

      And men could understand.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The dead yet find it, who, when here,<br/>

      Did love it more than this;<br/>

  They enter in, are filled with cheer,<br/>

      And pain expires in bliss.<br/>
</p>

<p>  All glorious gleams the blessed land!—<br/>

       O God, forgive, I pray:<br/>

  The heart thou holdest in thy hand<br/>

       Loves more this sunny day!<br/>
</p>

<p>  I see the hundred thousand wait<br/>

       Around the radiant throne:<br/>

  Ah, what a dreary, gilded state!<br/>

       What crowds of beings lone!<br/>
</p>

<p>  I do not care for singing psalms;<br/>

       I tire of good men's talk;<br/>

  To me there is no joy in palms,<br/>

       Or white-robed, solemn walk.<br/>
</p>

<p>  I love to hear the wild winds meet,<br/>

       The wild old winds at night;<br/>

  To watch the cold stars flash and beat,<br/>

       The feathery snow alight.<br/>
</p>

<p>  I love all tales of valiant men,<br/>

       Of women good and fair:<br/>

  If I were rich and strong, ah, then<br/>

      I would do something rare!<br/>
</p>

<p>  But for thy temple in the sky,<br/>

      Its pillars strong and white—<br/>

  I cannot love it, though I try,<br/>

      And long with all my might.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Sometimes a joy lays hold on me,<br/>

      And I am speechless then;<br/>

  Almost a martyr I could be,<br/>

      To join the holy men.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Straightway my heart is like a clod,<br/>

      My spirit wrapt in doubt:—<br/>

  <i>A pillar in the house of God,<br/>

      And never more go out</i>!<br/>
</p>

<p>  No more the sunny, breezy morn;<br/>

      All gone the glowing noon;<br/>

  No more the silent heath forlorn,<br/>

      The wan-faced waning moon!<br/>
</p>

<p>  My God, this heart will never burn,<br/>

      Must never taste thy joy!<br/>

  Even Jesus' face is calm and stern:<br/>

      I am a hapless boy!<br/>
</p>

<p>       *       *       *       *       *</p>

<h4>II.</h4>

<p>  I read good books. My heart despairs.<br/>

      In vain I try to dress<br/>

  My soul in feelings like to theirs—<br/>

      These men of holiness.<br/>
</p>

<p>  My thoughts, like doves, abroad I fling<br/>

      Into a country fair:<br/>

  Wind-baffled, back, with tired wing,<br/>

      They to my ark repair.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Or comes a sympathetic thrill<br/>

      With long-departed saint,<br/>

  A feeble dawn, without my will,<br/>

      Of feelings old and quaint,<br/>
</p>

<p>  As of a church's holy night,<br/>

      With low-browed chapels round,<br/>

  Where common sunshine dares not light<br/>

      On the too sacred ground,—<br/>
</p>

<p>  One glance at sunny fields of grain,<br/>

      One shout of child at play—<br/>

  A merry melody drives amain<br/>

      The one-toned chant away!<br/>
</p>

<p>  My spirit will not enter here<br/>

      To haunt the holy gloom;<br/>

  I gaze into a mirror mere,<br/>

      A mirror, not a room.<br/>
</p>

<p>  And as a bird against the pane<br/>

      Will strike, deceived sore,<br/>

  I think to enter, but remain<br/>

      Outside the closed door.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Oh, it will call for many a sigh<br/>

      If it be what it claims—<br/>

  This book, so unlike earth and sky,<br/>

      Unlike man's hopes and aims!—<br/>
</p>

<p>  To me a desert parched and bare—<br/>

      In which a spirit broods<br/>

  Whose wisdom I would gladly share<br/>

      At cost of many goods!<br/>
</p>

<p>       *       *       *       *       *</p>

<h5>III.</h5>

<p>  O hear me, God! O give me joy<br/>

      Such as thy chosen feel;<br/>

  Have pity on a wretched boy;<br/>

      My heart is hard as steel.<br/>
</p>

<p>  I have no care for what is good;<br/>

      Thyself I do not love;<br/>

  I relish not this Bible-food;<br/>

      My heaven is not above.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Thou wilt not hear: I come no more;<br/>

      Thou heedest not my woe.<br/>

  With sighs and tears my heart is sore.<br/>

      Thou comest not: I go.<br/>
</p>

<p>       *       *       *       *       *</p>

<h4>IV.</h4>

<p>  Once more I kneel. The earth is dark,<br/>

      And darker yet the air;<br/>

  If light there be, 'tis but a spark<br/>

      Amid a world's despair—<br/>
</p>

<p>  One hopeless hope there yet may be<br/>

      A God somewhere to hear;<br/>

  The God to whom I bend my knee—<br/>

      A God with open ear.<br/>
</p>

<p>  I know that men laugh still to scorn<br/>

      The grief that is my lot;<br/>

  Such wounds, they say, are hardly borne,<br/>

      But easily forgot.<br/>
</p>

<p>  What matter that my sorrows rest<br/>

      On ills which men despise!<br/>

  More hopeless heaves my aching breast<br/>

      Than when a prophet sighs.<br/>
</p>

<p>  AEons of griefs have come and gone—<br/>

      My grief is yet my mark.<br/>

  The sun sets every night, yet none<br/>

      Sees therefore in the dark.<br/>
</p>

<p>  There's love enough upon the earth,<br/>

      And beauty too, they say:<br/>

  There may be plenty, may be dearth,<br/>

      I care not any way.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The world hath melted from my sight;<br/>

      No grace in life is left;<br/>

  I cry to thee with all my might,<br/>

      Because I am bereft.<br/>
</p>

<p>  In vain I cry. The earth is dark,<br/>

      And darker yet the air;<br/>

  Of light there trembles now no spark<br/>

      In my lost soul's despair.<br/>
</p>

<p>       *       *       *       *       *</p>

<h5>V.</h5>

<p>  I sit and gaze from window high<br/>

      Down on the noisy street:<br/>

  No part in this great coil have I,<br/>

      No fate to go and meet.<br/>
</p>

<p>  My books unopened long have lain;<br/>

      In class I am all astray:<br/>

  The questions growing in my brain,<br/>

      Demand and have their way.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Knowledge is power, the people cry;<br/>

      Grave men the lure repeat:<br/>

  After some rarer thing I sigh,<br/>

      That makes the pulses beat.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Old truths, new facts, they preach aloud—<br/>

      Their tones like wisdom fall:<br/>

  One sunbeam glancing on a cloud<br/>

      Hints things beyond them all.<br/>
</p>

<p>       *       *       *       *       *</p>

<h4>VI.</h4>

<p>  But something is not right within;<br/>

      High hopes are far gone by.<br/>

  Was it a bootless aim—to win<br/>

      Sight of a loftier sky?<br/>
</p>

<p>  They preach men should not faint, but pray,<br/>

      And seek until they find;<br/>

  But God is very far away,<br/>

      Nor is his countenance kind.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Yet every night my father prayed,<br/>

      Withdrawing from the throng!<br/>

  Some answer must have come that made<br/>

      His heart so high and strong!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Once more I'll seek the God of men,<br/>

      Redeeming childhood's vow.—<br/>

  —I failed with bitter weeping then,<br/>

      And fail cold-hearted now!<br/>
</p>

<h4>VII.</h4>

<p>  Why search for God? A man I tread<br/>

      This old life-bearing earth;<br/>

  High thoughts awake and lift my head—<br/>

      In me they have their birth.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The preacher says a Christian must<br/>

      Do all the good he can:—<br/>

  I must be noble, true, and just,<br/>

      Because I am a man!<br/>
</p>

<p>  They say a man must watch, and keep<br/>

      Lamp burning, garments white,<br/>

  Else he shall sit without and weep<br/>

      When Christ comes home at night:—<br/>
</p>

<p>  A man must hold his honour free,<br/>

      His conscience must not stain,<br/>

  Or soil, I say, the dignity<br/>

      Of heart and blood and brain!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Yes, I say well—said words are cheap!<br/>

      For action man was born!<br/>

  What praise will my one talent reap?<br/>

      What grapes are on my thorn?<br/>
</p>

<p>  Have high words kept me pure enough?<br/>

      In evil have I no part?<br/>

  Hath not my bosom "perilous stuff<br/>

      That weighs upon the heart"?<br/>
</p>

<p>  I am not that which I do praise;<br/>

      I do not that I say;<br/>

  I sit a talker in the ways,<br/>

      A dreamer in the day!<br/>
</p>

<h4>VIII.</h4>

<p>  The preacher's words are true, I know—<br/>

      That man may lose his life;<br/>

  That every man must downward go<br/>

      Without the upward strife.<br/>
</p>

<p>  'Twere well my soul should cease to roam,<br/>

      Should seek and have and hold!<br/>

  It may be there is yet a home<br/>

      In that religion old.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Again I kneel, again I pray:<br/>

      <i>Wilt thou be God to me?<br/>

  Wilt thou give ear to what I say,<br/>

      And lift me up to thee</i>?<br/>
</p>

<p>  Lord, is it true? Oh, vision high!<br/>

      The clouds of heaven dispart;<br/>

  An opening depth of loving sky<br/>

      Looks down into my heart!<br/>
</p>

<p>  There <i>is</i> a home wherein to dwell—<br/>

      The very heart of light!<br/>

  Thyself my sun immutable,<br/>

      My moon and stars all night!<br/>
</p>

<p>  I thank thee, Lord. It must be so,<br/>

      Its beauty is so good.<br/>

  Up in my heart thou mad'st it go,<br/>

      And I have understood.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The clouds return. The common day<br/>

      Falls on me like a <i>No</i>;<br/>

  But I have seen what might be—may,<br/>

      And with a hope I go.<br/>
</p>

<h4>IX.</h4>

<p>  I am a stranger in the land;<br/>

      It gives no welcome dear;<br/>

  Its lilies bloom not for my hand,<br/>

      Its roses for my cheer.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The sunshine used to make me glad,<br/>

      But now it knows me not;<br/>

  This weight of brightness makes me sad—<br/>

      It isolates a blot.<br/>
</p>

<p>  I am forgotten by the hills,<br/>

      And by the river's play;<br/>

  No look of recognition thrills<br/>

      The features of the day.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Then only am I moved to song,<br/>

      When down the darkening street,<br/>

  While vanishes the scattered throng,<br/>

      The driving rain I meet.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The rain pours down. My thoughts awake,<br/>

      Like flowers that languished long;<br/>

  From bare cold hills the night-winds break,<br/>

      From me the unwonted song.<br/>
</p>

<h4>X.</h4>

<p>  I read the Bible with my eyes,<br/>

      But hardly with my brain;<br/>

  Should this the meaning recognize,<br/>

      My heart yet reads in vain.<br/>
</p>

<p>  These words of promise and of woe<br/>

      Seem but a tinkling sound;<br/>

  As through an ancient tomb I go,<br/>

      With dust-filled urns around.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Or, as a sadly searching child,<br/>

      Afar from love and home,<br/>

  Sits in an ancient chamber, piled<br/>

      With scroll and musty tome,<br/>
</p>

<p>  So I, in these epistles old<br/>

      From men of heavenly care,<br/>

  Find all the thoughts of other mould<br/>

      Than I can love or share.<br/>
</p>

<p>  No sympathy with mine they show,<br/>

      Their world is not the same;<br/>

  They move me not with joy or woe,<br/>

      They touch me not with blame.<br/>
</p>

<p>  I hear no word that calls my life,<br/>

      Or owns my struggling powers;<br/>

  Those ancient ages had their strife,<br/>

      But not a strife like ours.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Oh, not like men they move and speak,<br/>

      Those pictures in old panes!<br/>

  They alter not their aspect meek<br/>

      For all the winds and rains!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Their thoughts are full of figures strange,<br/>

      Of Jewish forms and rites:<br/>

  A world of air and sea I range,<br/>

      Of mornings and of nights!<br/>
</p>

<h3>XI.</h3>

<p>  I turn me to the gospel-tale:—<br/>

      My hope is faint with fear<br/>

  That hungriest search will not avail<br/>

      To find a refuge here.<br/>
</p>

<p>  A misty wind blows bare and rude<br/>

      From dead seas of the past;<br/>

  And through the clouds that halt and brood,<br/>

      Dim dawns a shape at last:<br/>
</p>

<p>  A sad worn man who bows his face,<br/>

      And treads a frightful path,<br/>

  To save an abject hopeless race<br/>

      From an eternal wrath.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Kind words he speaks—but all the time<br/>

      As from a formless height<br/>

  To which no human foot can climb—<br/>

      Half-swathed in ancient night.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Nay, sometimes, and to gentle heart,<br/>

      Unkind words from him go!<br/>

  Surely it is no saviour's part<br/>

      To speak to women so!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Much rather would I refuge take<br/>

      With Mary, dear to me,<br/>

  To whom that rough hard speech he spake—<br/>

      <i>What have I to do with thee</i>?<br/>
</p>

<p>  Surely I know men tenderer,<br/>

      Women of larger soul,<br/>

  Who need no prayer their hearts to stir,<br/>

      Who always would make whole!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Oftenest he looks a weary saint,<br/>

      Embalmed in pallid gleam;<br/>

  Listless and sad, without complaint,<br/>

      Like dead man in a dream.<br/>
</p>

<p>  And, at the best, he is uplift<br/>

      A spectacle, a show:—<br/>

  The worth of such an outworn gift<br/>

      I know too much to know!<br/>
</p>

<p>  How find the love to pay my debt?—<br/>

      He leads me from the sun!—<br/>

  Yet it is hard men should forget<br/>

      A good deed ever done!—<br/>
</p>

<p>  Forget that he, to foil a curse,<br/>

      Did, on that altar-hill,<br/>

  Sun of a sunless universe,<br/>

      Hang dying, patient, still!<br/>
</p>

<p>  But what is He, whose pardon slow<br/>

      At so much blood is priced?—<br/>

  If such thou art, O Jove, I go<br/>

      To the Promethean Christ!<br/>
</p>

<h4>XII.</h4>

<p>  A word within says I am to blame,<br/>

      And therefore must confess;<br/>

  Must call my doing by its name,<br/>

      And so make evil less.<br/>
</p>

<p>  "I could not his false triumph bear,<br/>

      For he was first in wrong."<br/>

  "Thy own ill-doings are thy care,<br/>

      His to himself belong."<br/>
</p>

<p>  "To do it right, my heart should own<br/>

      Some sorrow for the ill."<br/>

  "Plain, honest words will half atone,<br/>

      And they are in thy will."<br/>
</p>

<p>  The struggle comes. Evil or I<br/>

      Must gain the victory now.<br/>

  I am unmoved and yet would try:<br/>

      O God, to thee I bow.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The skies are brass; there falls no aid;<br/>

      No wind of help will blow.<br/>

  But I bethink me:—I am made<br/>

      A man: I rise and go.<br/>
</p>

<h4>XIII.</h4>

<p>  To Christ I needs must come, they say;<br/>

      Who went to death for me:<br/>

  I turn aside; I come, I pray,<br/>

      My unknown God, to thee.<br/>
</p>

<p>  He is afar; the story old<br/>

      Is blotted, worn, and dim;<br/>

  With thee, O God, I can be bold—<br/>

      I cannot pray to him.<br/>
</p>

<p>  <i>Pray</i>! At the word a cloudy grief<br/>

      Around me folds its pall:<br/>

  Nothing I have to call belief!<br/>

      How can I pray at all?<br/>
</p>

<p>  I know not if a God be there<br/>

      To heed my crying sore;<br/>

  If in the great world anywhere<br/>

      An ear keeps open door!<br/>
</p>

<p>  An unborn faith I will not nurse,<br/>

      Pursue an endless task;<br/>

  Loud out into its universe<br/>

      My soul shall call and ask!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Is there no God—earth, sky, and sea<br/>

      Are but a chaos wild!<br/>

  Is there a God—I know that he<br/>

      Must hear his calling child!<br/>
</p>

<h4>XIV.</h4>

<p>  I kneel. But all my soul is dumb<br/>

      With hopeless misery:<br/>

  Is he a friend who will not come,<br/>

      Whose face I must not see?<br/>
</p>

<p>  I do not think of broken laws,<br/>

      Of judge's damning word;<br/>

  My heart is all one ache, because<br/>

      I call and am not heard.<br/>
</p>

<p>  A cry where there is none to hear,<br/>

      Doubles the lonely pain;<br/>

  Returns in silence on the ear,<br/>

      In torture on the brain.<br/>
</p>

<p>  No look of love a smile can bring,<br/>

      No kiss wile back the breath<br/>

  To cold lips: I no answer wring<br/>

      From this great face of death.<br/>
</p>

<h4>XV.</h4>

<p>  Yet sometimes when the agony<br/>

      Dies of its own excess,<br/>

  A dew-like calm descends on me,<br/>

      A shadow of tenderness;<br/>
</p>

<p>  A sense of bounty and of grace,<br/>

      A cool air in my breast,<br/>

  As if my soul were yet a place<br/>

      Where peace might one day rest.<br/>
</p>

<p>  God! God! I say, and cry no more,<br/>

      But rise, and think to stand<br/>

  Unwearied at the closed door<br/>

      Till comes the opening hand.<br/>
</p>

<h4>XVI.</h4>

<p>  But is it God?—Once more the fear<br/>

      Of <i>No God</i> loads my breath:<br/>

  Amid a sunless atmosphere<br/>

      I fight again with death.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Such rest may be like that which lulls<br/>

      The man who fainting lies:<br/>

  His bloodless brain his spirit dulls,<br/>

      Draws darkness o'er his eyes.<br/>
</p>

<p>  But even such sleep, my heart responds,<br/>

      May be the ancient rest<br/>

  Rising released from bodily bonds,<br/>

      And flowing unreprest.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The o'ertasked will falls down aghast<br/>

      In individual death;<br/>

  God puts aside the severed past,<br/>

      Breathes-in a primal breath.<br/>
</p>

<p>  For how should torture breed a calm?<br/>

      Can death to life give birth?<br/>

  No labour can create the balm<br/>

      That soothes the sleeping earth!<br/>
</p>

<p>  I yet will hope the very One<br/>

      Whose love is life in me,<br/>

  Did, when my strength was overdone,<br/>

      Inspire serenity.<br/>
</p>

<h5>XVII.</h5>

<p>  When the hot sun's too urgent might<br/>

      Hath shrunk the tender leaf,<br/>

  Water comes sliding down the night,<br/>

      And makes its sorrow brief.<br/>
</p>

<p>  When poet's heart is in eclipse,<br/>

      A glance from childhood's eye,<br/>

  A smile from passing maiden's lips,<br/>

      Will clear a glowing sky.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Might not from God such influence come<br/>

      A dying hope to lift?<br/>

  Might he not send to poor heart some<br/>

      Unmediated gift?<br/>
</p>

<p>  My child lies moaning, lost in dreams,<br/>

      Abandoned, sore dismayed;<br/>

  Her fancy's world with horror teems,<br/>

      Her soul is much afraid:<br/>
</p>

<p>  I lay my hand upon her breast,<br/>

      Her moaning dies away;<br/>

  She does not wake, but, lost in rest,<br/>

      Sleeps on into the day.<br/>
</p>

<p>  And when my heart with soft release<br/>

      Grows calm as summer-sea,<br/>

  Shall I not hope the God of peace<br/>

      Hath laid his hand on me?<br/>
</p>

<h4>XVIII.</h4>

<p>  But why from thought should fresh doubt start—<br/>

      An ever-lengthening cord?<br/>

  Might he not make my troubled heart<br/>

      Right sure it was the Lord?<br/>
</p>

<p>  God will not let a smaller boon<br/>

      Hinder the coming best;<br/>

  A granted sign might all too soon<br/>

      Rejoice thee into rest.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Yet could not any sign, though grand<br/>

      As hosts of fire about,<br/>

  Though lovely as a sunset-land,<br/>

      Secure thy soul from doubt.<br/>
</p>

<p>  A smile from one thou lovedst well<br/>

      Gladdened thee all the day;<br/>

  The doubt which all day far did dwell<br/>

      Came home with twilight gray.<br/>
</p>

<p>  For doubt will come, will ever come,<br/>

      Though signs be perfect good,<br/>

  Till heart to heart strike doubting dumb,<br/>

      And both are understood.<br/>
</p>

<h4>XIX.</h4>

<p>  I shall behold him, one day, nigh.<br/>

      Assailed with glory keen,<br/>

  My eyes will open wide, and I<br/>

      Shall see as I am seen.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Of nothing can my heart be sure<br/>

      Except the highest, best<br/>

  When God I see with vision pure,<br/>

      That sight will be my rest.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Forward I look with longing eye,<br/>

      And still my hope renew;<br/>

  Backward, and think that from the sky<br/>

      <i>Did</i> come that falling dew.<br/>
</p>

<h4>XX.</h4>

<p>  But if a vision should unfold<br/>

      That I might banish fear;<br/>

  That I, the chosen, might be bold,<br/>

      And walk with upright cheer;<br/>
</p>

<p>  My heart would cry: But shares my race<br/>

      In this great love of thine?<br/>

  I pray, put me not in good case<br/>

      Where others lack and pine.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Nor claim I thus a loving heart<br/>

      That for itself is mute:<br/>

  In such love I desire no part<br/>

      As reaches not my root.<br/>
</p>

<p>  But if my brothers thou dost call<br/>

      As children to thy knee,<br/>

  Thou givest me my being's all,<br/>

      Thou sayest child to me.<br/>
</p>

<p>  If thou to me alone shouldst give,<br/>

      My heart were all beguiled:<br/>

  It would not be because I live,<br/>

      And am my Father's child!<br/>
</p>

<h4>XXI.</h4>

<p>  As little comfort would it bring,<br/>

      Amid a throng to pass;<br/>

  To stand with thousands worshipping<br/>

      Upon the sea of glass;<br/>
</p>

<p>  To know that, of a sinful world,<br/>

      I one was saved as well;<br/>

  My roll of ill with theirs upfurled,<br/>

      And cast in deepest hell;<br/>
</p>

<p>  That God looked bounteously on one,<br/>

      Because on many men;<br/>

  As shone Judea's earthly sun<br/>

      On all the healed ten.<br/>
</p>

<p>  No; thou must be a God to me<br/>

      As if but me were none;<br/>

  I such a perfect child to thee<br/>

      As if thou hadst but one.<br/>
</p>

<h4>XXII.</h4>

<p>  Oh, then, my Father, hast thou not<br/>

      A blessing just for me?<br/>

  Shall I be, barely, not forgot?—<br/>

      Never come home to thee?<br/>
</p>

<p>  Hast thou no care for this one child,<br/>

      This thinking, living need?<br/>

  Or is thy countenance only mild,<br/>

      Thy heart not love indeed?<br/>
</p>

<p>  For some eternal joy I pray,<br/>

      To make me strong and free;<br/>

  Yea, such a friend I need alway<br/>

      As thou alone canst be.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Is not creative infinitude<br/>

      Able, in every man,<br/>

  To turn itself to every mood<br/>

      Since God man's life began?<br/>
</p>

<p>  Art thou not each man's God—his own,<br/>

      With secret words between,<br/>

  As thou and he lived all alone,<br/>

      Insphered in silence keen?<br/>
</p>

<p>  Ah, God, my heart is not the same<br/>

      As any heart beside;<br/>

  My pain is different, and my blame,<br/>

      My pity and my pride!<br/>
</p>

<p>  My history thou know'st, my thoughts<br/>

      Different from other men's;<br/>

  Thou knowest all the sheep and goats<br/>

      That mingle in my pens.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Thou knowest I a love might bring<br/>

      By none beside me due;<br/>

  One praiseful song at least might sing<br/>

      Which could not but be new.<br/>
</p>

<h4>XXIII.</h4>

<p>  Nor seek I thus to stand apart,<br/>

      In aught my kind above;<br/>

  My neighbour, ah, my troubled heart<br/>

      Must rest ere thee it love!<br/>
</p>

<p>  If God love not, I have no care,<br/>

      No power to love, no hope.<br/>

  What is life here or anywhere?<br/>

      Or why with darkness cope?<br/>
</p>

<p>  I scorn my own love's every sign,<br/>

      So feeble, selfish, low,<br/>

  If his love give no pledge that mine<br/>

      Shall one day perfect grow.<br/>
</p>

<p>  But if I knew Thy love even such,<br/>

      As tender and intense<br/>

  As, tested by its human touch,<br/>

      Would satisfy my sense<br/>
</p>

<p>  Of what a father never was<br/>

     But should be to his son,<br/>

  My heart would leap for joy, because<br/>

      My rescue was begun.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Oh then my love, by thine set free,<br/>

      Would overflow thy men;<br/>

  In every face my heart would see<br/>

      God shining out again!<br/>
</p>

<p>  There are who hold high festival<br/>

      And at the board crown Death:<br/>

  I am too weak to live at all<br/>

      Except I breathe thy breath.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Show me a love that nothing bates,<br/>

      Absolute, self-severe—<br/>

  Even at Gehenna's prayerless gates<br/>

      I should not "taint with fear."<br/>
</p>

<h4>XXIV.</h4>

<p>  I cannot brook that men should say—<br/>

      Nor this for gospel take—<br/>

  That thou wilt hear me if I pray<br/>

      Asking for Jesus' sake.<br/>
</p>

<p>  For love to him is not to me,<br/>

      And cannot lift my fate;<br/>

  The love is not that is not free,<br/>

      Perfect, immediate.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Love is salvation: life without<br/>

      No moment can endure.<br/>

  Those sheep alone go in and out<br/>

      Who know thy love is pure.<br/>
</p>

<h4>XXV.</h4>

<p>  But what if God requires indeed,<br/>

      For cause yet unrevealed,<br/>

  Assent to one fixed form of creed,<br/>

      Such as I cannot yield?<br/>
</p>

<p>  Has God made <i>for Christ's sake</i> a test—<br/>

      To take or leave the crust,<br/>

  That only he may have the best<br/>

      Who licks the serpent-dust?<br/>
</p>

<p>  No, no; the words I will not say<br/>

      With the responding folk;<br/>

  I at his feet a heart would lay,<br/>

      Not shoulders for a yoke.<br/>
</p>

<p>  He were no lord of righteousness<br/>

      Who subjects such would gain<br/>

  As yield their birthright for a mess<br/>

      Of liberty from pain!<br/>
</p>

<p>  "And wilt thou bargain then with Him?"<br/>

      The priest makes answer high.<br/>

  'Tis thou, priest, makest the sky dim:<br/>

      My hope is in the sky.<br/>
</p>

<h4>XXVI.</h4>

<p>  But is my will alive, awake?<br/>

      The one God will not heed<br/>

  If in my lips or hands I take<br/>

      A half-word or half-deed.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Hour after hour I sit and dream,<br/>

      Amazed in outwardness;<br/>

  The powers of things that only seem<br/>

      The things that are oppress;<br/>
</p>

<p>  Till in my soul some discord sounds,<br/>

      Till sinks some yawning lack;<br/>

  Then turn I from life's rippling rounds,<br/>

      And unto thee come back.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Thou seest how poor a thing am I,<br/>

      Yet hear, whate'er I be;<br/>

  Despairing of my will, I cry,<br/>

      Be God enough to me.<br/>
</p>

<p>  My spirit, low, irresolute,<br/>

      I cast before thy feet;<br/>

  And wait, while even prayer is mute,<br/>

      For what thou judgest meet.<br/>
</p>

<h4>XXVII.</h4>

<p>  My safety lies not, any hour,<br/>

      In what I generate,<br/>

  But in the living, healing power<br/>

      Of that which doth create.<br/>
</p>

<p>  If he is God to the incomplete,<br/>

      Fulfilling lack and need,<br/>

  Then I may cast before his feet<br/>

      A half-word or half-deed.<br/>
</p>

<p>  I bring, Lord, to thy altar-stair,<br/>

      To thee, love-glorious,<br/>

  My very lack of will and prayer,<br/>

      And cry—Thou seest me thus!<br/>
</p>

<p>  From some old well of life they flow!<br/>

      The words my being fill!—<br/>

  "Of me that man the truth shall know<br/>

      Who wills the Father's will."<br/>
</p>

<h4>XXVIII.</h4>

<p>  What is his will?—that I may go<br/>

      And do it, in the hope<br/>

  That light will rise and spread and grow,<br/>

      As deed enlarges scope.<br/>
</p>

<p>  I need not search the sacred book<br/>

      To find my duty clear;<br/>

  Scarce in my bosom need I look,<br/>

      It lies so very near.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Henceforward I must watch the door<br/>

      Of word and action too;<br/>

  There's one thing I must do no more,<br/>

      Another I must do.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Alas, these are such little things!<br/>

      No glory in their birth!<br/>

  Doubt from their common aspect springs—<br/>

      If God will count them worth.<br/>
</p>

<p>  But here I am not left to choose,<br/>

      My duty is my lot;<br/>

  And weighty things will glory lose<br/>

      If small ones are forgot.<br/>
</p>

<p>  I am not worthy high things yet;<br/>

      I'll humbly do my own;<br/>

  Good care of sheep may so beget<br/>

      A fitness for the throne.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Ah fool! why dost thou reason thus?<br/>

      Ambition's very fool!<br/>

  Through high and low, each glorious,<br/>

      Shines God's all-perfect rule.<br/>
</p>

<p>  'Tis God I need, not rank in good:<br/>

      'Tis Life, not honour's meed;<br/>

  With him to fill my every mood,<br/>

      I am content indeed.<br/>
</p>

<h4>XXIX.</h4>

<p>  <i>Will do: shall know</i>: I feel the force,<br/>

      The fullness of the word;<br/>

  His holy boldness held its course,<br/>

      Claiming divine accord.<br/>
</p>

<p>  What if, as yet, I have never seen<br/>

      The true face of the Man!<br/>

  The named notion may have been<br/>

      A likeness vague and wan;<br/>
</p>

<p>  A thing of such unblended hues<br/>

      As, on his chamber wall,<br/>

  The humble peasant gladly views,<br/>

      And <i>Jesus Christ</i> doth call.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The story I did never scan<br/>

      With vision calm and strong;<br/>

  Have never tried to see the Man,<br/>

      The many words among.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Pictures there are that do not please<br/>

      With any sweet surprise,<br/>

  But gain the heart by slow degrees<br/>

      Until they feast the eyes;<br/>
</p>

<p>  And if I ponder what they call<br/>

      The gospel of God's grace,<br/>

  Through mists that slowly melt and fall<br/>

      May dawn a human face.<br/>
</p>

<p>  What face? Oh, heart-uplifting thought,<br/>

      That face may dawn on me<br/>

  Which Moses on the mountain sought,<br/>

      God would not let him see!<br/>
</p>

<h4>XXX.</h4>

<p>  All faint at first, as wrapt in veil<br/>

      Of Sinai's cloudy dark,<br/>

  But dawning as I read the tale,<br/>

      I slow discern and mark<br/>
</p>

<p>  A gracious, simple, truthful man,<br/>

      Who walks the earth erect,<br/>

  Nor stoops his noble head to one<br/>

      From fear or false respect;<br/>
</p>

<p>  Who seeks to climb no high estate,<br/>

      No low consent secure,<br/>

  With high and low serenely great,<br/>

      Because his love is pure.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Oh not alone, high o'er our reach,<br/>

      Our joys and griefs beyond!<br/>

  To him 'tis joy divine to teach<br/>

      Where human hearts respond;<br/>
</p>

<p>  And grief divine it was to him<br/>

      To see the souls that slept:<br/>

  "How often, O Jerusalem!"<br/>

      He said, and gazed, and wept.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Love was his very being's root,<br/>

      And healing was its flower;<br/>

  Love, human love, its stem and fruit,<br/>

      Its gladness and its power.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Life of high God, till then unseen!<br/>

      Undreamt-of glorious show!<br/>

  Glad, faithful, childlike, love-serene!—<br/>

      How poor am I! how low!<br/>
</p>

<h4>XXXI.</h4>

<p>  As in a living well I gaze,<br/>

      Kneeling upon its brink:<br/>

  What are the very words he says?<br/>

      What did the one man think?<br/>
</p>

<p>  I find his heart was all above;<br/>

      Obedience his one thought;<br/>

  Reposing in his father's love,<br/>

      His father's will he sought.<br/>
</p>

<p>       *       *       *       *       *</p>

<h5>XXXII.</h5>

<p>  Years have passed o'er my broken plan<br/>

      To picture out a strife,<br/>

  Where ancient Death, in horror wan,<br/>

      Faced young and fearing Life.<br/>
</p>

<p>  More of the tale I tell not so—<br/>

      But for myself would say:<br/>

  My heart is quiet with what I know,<br/>

      With what I hope, is gay.<br/>
</p>

<p>  And where I cannot set my faith,<br/>

      Unknowing or unwise,<br/>

  I say "If this be what <i>he</i> saith,<br/>

      Here hidden treasure lies."<br/>
</p>

<p>  Through years gone by since thus I strove,<br/>

      Thus shadowed out my strife,<br/>

  While at my history I wove,<br/>

      Thou wovest in the life.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Through poverty that had no lack<br/>

      For friends divinely good;<br/>

  Through pain that not too long did rack,<br/>

      Through love that understood;<br/>
</p>

<p>  Through light that taught me what to hold<br/>

      And what to cast away;<br/>

  Through thy forgiveness manifold,<br/>

      And things I cannot say,<br/>
</p>

<p>  Here thou hast brought me—able now<br/>

      To kiss thy garment's hem,<br/>

  Entirely to thy will to bow,<br/>

      And trust thee even for them<br/>
</p>

<p>  Who in the darkness and the mire<br/>

      Walk with rebellious feet,<br/>

  Loose trailing, Lo, their soiled attire<br/>

      For heavenly floor unmeet!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Lord Jesus Christ, I know not how—<br/>

      With this blue air, blue sea,<br/>

  This yellow sand, that grassy brow,<br/>

      All isolating me—<br/>
</p>

<p>  Thy thoughts to mine themselves impart,<br/>

      My thoughts to thine draw near;<br/>

  But thou canst fill who mad'st my heart,<br/>

      Who gav'st me words must hear.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Thou mad'st the hand with which I write,<br/>

      The eye that watches slow<br/>

  Through rosy gates that rosy light<br/>

      Across thy threshold go;<br/>
</p>

<p>  Those waves that bend in golden spray,<br/>

      As if thy foot they bore:<br/>

  I think I know thee, Lord, to-day,<br/>

      Shall know thee evermore.<br/>
</p>

<p>  I know thy father thine and mine:<br/>

      Thou the great fact hast bared:<br/>

  Master, the mighty words are thine—<br/>

      Such I had never dared!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Lord, thou hast much to make me yet—<br/>

      Thy father's infant still:<br/>

  Thy mind, Son, in my bosom set,<br/>

      That I may grow thy will.<br/>
</p>

<p>  My soul with truth clothe all about,<br/>

      And I shall question free:<br/>

  The man that feareth, Lord, to doubt,<br/>

      In that fear doubteth thee.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-child-mother" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Child-Mother</h2>
<p>  Heavily slumbered noonday bright<br/>

  Upon the lone field, glory-dight,<br/>

    A burnished grassy sea:<br/>

  The child, in gorgeous golden hours,<br/>

  Through heaven-descended starry flowers,<br/>

    Went walking on the lea.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Velvety bees make busy hum;<br/>

  Green flies and striped wasps go and come;<br/>

    The butterflies gleam white;<br/>

  Blue-burning, vaporous, to and fro<br/>

  The dragon-flies like arrows go,<br/>

    Or hang in moveless flight:—<br/>
</p>

<p>  Not one she followed; like a rill<br/>

  She wandered on with quiet will;<br/>

    Received, but did not miss;<br/>

  Her step was neither quick nor long;<br/>

  Nought but a snatch of murmured song<br/>

    Ever revealed her bliss.<br/>
</p>

<p>  An almost solemn woman-child,<br/>

  Not fashioned frolicsome and wild,<br/>

    She had more love than glee;<br/>

  And now, though nine and nothing more,<br/>

  Another little child she bore,<br/>

    Almost as big as she.<br/>
</p>

<p>  No silken cloud from solar harms<br/>

  Had she to spread; with shifting arms<br/>

    She dodged him from the sun;<br/>

  Mother and sister both in heart,<br/>

  She did a gracious woman's part,<br/>

    Life's task even now begun!<br/>
</p>

<p>  They came upon a stagnant ditch,<br/>

  The slippery sloping banks of which<br/>

    More varied blossoms line;<br/>

  Some ragged-robins baby spies,<br/>

  Stretches his hands, and crows and cries,<br/>

    Plain saying, "They are mine!"<br/>
</p>

<p>  What baby wants, that baby has—<br/>

  A law unalterable as<br/>

    The poor shall serve the rich:<br/>

  They are beyond her reach—almost!<br/>

  She kneels, she strains, and, too engrossed,<br/>

    Topples into the ditch.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Adown the side she slanting rolled,<br/>

  But her two arms convulsive hold<br/>

    The precious baby tight;<br/>

  She lets herself sublimely go,<br/>

  And in the ditch's muddy flow<br/>

    Stands up, in evil plight.<br/>
</p>

<p>  'Tis nothing that her feet are wet,<br/>

  But her new shoes she can't forget—<br/>

    They cost five shillings bright!<br/>

  Her petticoat, her tippet blue,<br/>

  Her frock, they're smeared with slime like glue!<br/>

    But baby is all right!<br/>
</p>

<p>  And baby laughs, and baby crows;<br/>

  And baby being right, she knows<br/>

    That nothing can be wrong;<br/>

  So, with a troubled heart yet stout,<br/>

  She plans how <i>ever</i> to get out<br/>

    With meditation long.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The high bank's edge is far away,<br/>

  The slope is steep, and made of clay;<br/>

    And what to do with baby?<br/>

  For even a monkey, up to run,<br/>

  Would need his four hands, every one:—<br/>

    She is perplexed as may be.<br/>
</p>

<p>  And all her puzzling is no good!<br/>

  Blank-staring up the side she stood,<br/>

    Which, settling she, grew higher.<br/>

  At last, seized with a fresh dismay<br/>

  Lest baby's patience should give way,<br/>

    She plucked her feet from the mire,<br/>
</p>

<p>  And up and down the ditch, not glad,<br/>

  But patient, very, did promenade—<br/>

    Splash, splash, went her small feet!<br/>

  And baby thought it rare good fun,<br/>

  Sucking his bit of pulpy bun,<br/>

    And smelling meadow-sweet.<br/>
</p>

<p>  But, oh, the world that she had left—<br/>

  The meads from her so lately reft—<br/>

    Poor infant Proserpine!<br/>

  A fabled land they lay above,<br/>

  A paradise of sunny love,<br/>

    In breezy space divine!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Frequent from neighbouring village-green<br/>

  Came sounds of laughter, faintly keen,<br/>

    And barks of well-known dogs,<br/>

  While she, the hot sun overhead,<br/>

  Her lonely watery way must tread<br/>

    In mud and weeds and frogs!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Sudden, the ditch about her shakes;<br/>

  Her little heart, responsive, quakes<br/>

    With fear of uncouth woes;<br/>

  She lifts her boding eyes perforce—<br/>

  To see the huge head of a horse<br/>

    Go past upon its nose.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Then, hark, what sounds of tearing grass<br/>

  And puffing breath!—With knobs of brass<br/>

    On horns of frightful size,<br/>

  A cow's head through the broken hedge<br/>

  Looks awful from the other edge,<br/>

    Though mild her pondering eyes.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The horse, the cow are passed and gone;<br/>

  The sun keeps going on and on,<br/>

    And still no help comes near.—<br/>

  At misery's last—oh joy, the sound<br/>

  Of human footsteps on the ground!<br/>

    She cried aloud, "<i>I</i>'m here!"<br/>
</p>

<p>  It was a man—oh, heavenly joy!<br/>

  He looked amazed at girl and boy,<br/>

    And reached his hand so strong:<br/>

  "Give me the child," he said; but no!<br/>

  Care would not let the burden go<br/>

    Which Love had borne so long.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Smiling he kneels with outstretched hands,<br/>

  And them unparted safely lands<br/>

    In the upper world again.<br/>

  Her low thanks feebly murmured, she<br/>

  Drags her legs homeward painfully—<br/>

    Poor, wet, one-chickened hen!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Arrived at length—Lo, scarce a speck<br/>

  Was on the child from heel to neck,<br/>

    Though she was sorely mired!<br/>

  No tear confessed the long-drawn rack,<br/>

  Till her mother took the baby back,<br/>

    And the she cried, "I'm tired!"<br/>
</p>

<p>  And, intermixed with sobbing wail,<br/>

  She told her mother all the tale,<br/>

    Her wet cheeks in a glow:<br/>

  "But, mother, mother, though I fell,<br/>

  I kept the baby pretty well—<br/>

    I did not let him go!"<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="loves-ordeal" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Love's Ordeal</h2>
<p>A recollection and attempted completion of a prose fragment read in
boyhood.</p>

<p>  "Hear'st thou that sound upon the window pane?"<br/>

Said the youth softly, as outstretched he lay<br/>

Where for an hour outstretched he had lain—<br/>

Softly, yet with some token of dismay.<br/>

Answered the maiden: "It is but the rain<br/>

That has been gathering in the west all day!<br/>

Why shouldst thou hearken so? Thine eyelids close,<br/>

And let me gather peace from thy repose."<br/>
</p>

<p>  "Hear'st thou that moan creeping along the ground?"<br/>

Said the youth, and his veiling eyelids rose<br/>

From deeps of lightning-haunted dark profound<br/>

Ruffled with herald blasts of coming woes.<br/>

"I hear it," said the maiden; "'tis the sound<br/>

Of a great wind that here not seldom blows;<br/>

It swings the huge arms of the dreary pine,<br/>

But thou art safe, my darling, clasped in mine."<br/>
</p>

<p>  "Hear'st thou the baying of my hounds?" said he;<br/>

"Draw back the lattice bar and let them in."<br/>

From a rent cloud the moonlight, ghostily,<br/>

Slid clearer to the floor, as, gauntly thin,<br/>

She opening, they leaped through with bound so free,<br/>

Then shook the rain-drops from their shaggy skin.<br/>

The maiden closed the shower-bespattered glass,<br/>

Whose spotted shadow through the room did pass.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The youth, half-raised, was leaning on his hand,<br/>

But, when again beside him sat the maid,<br/>

His eyes for one slow minute having scanned<br/>

Her moonlit face, he laid him down, and said,<br/>

Monotonous, like solemn-read command:<br/>

"For Love is of the earth, earthy, and is laid<br/>

Lifeless at length back in the mother-tomb."<br/>

Strange moanings from the pine entered the room.<br/>
</p>

<p>  And then two shadows like the shadow of glass,<br/>

Over the moonbeams on the cottage floor,<br/>

As wind almost as thin and shapeless, pass;<br/>

A sound of rain-drops came about the door,<br/>

And a soft sighing as of plumy grass;<br/>

A look of sorrowing doubt the youth's face wore;<br/>

The two great hounds half rose; with aspect grim<br/>

They eyed his countenance by the taper dim.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Shadow nor moaning sound the maiden noted,<br/>

But on his face dwelt her reproachful look;<br/>

She doubted whether he the saying had quoted<br/>

Out of some evil, earth-begotten book,<br/>

Or up from his deep heart, like bubbles, had floated<br/>

Words which no maiden ever yet could brook;<br/>

But his eyes held the question, "Yea or No?"<br/>

Therefore the maiden answered, "Nay, not so;<br/>
</p>

<p>  "Love is of heaven, eternal." Half a smile<br/>

Just twinned his lips: shy, like all human best,<br/>

A hopeful thought bloomed out, and lived a while;<br/>

He looked one moment like a dead man blest—<br/>

His soul a bark that in a sunny isle<br/>

At length had found the haven of its rest;<br/>

But he could not remain, must forward fare:<br/>

He spoke, and said with words abrupt and bare,<br/>
</p>

<p>  "Maiden, I have loved other maidens." Pale<br/>

Her red lips grew. "I loved them, yes, but they<br/>

Successively in trial's hour did fail,<br/>

For after sunset clouds again are gray."<br/>

A sudden light shone through the fringy veil<br/>

That drooping hid her eyes; and then there lay<br/>

A stillness on her face, waiting; and then<br/>

The little clock rung out the hour of ten.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Moaning once more the great pine-branches bow<br/>

To a soft plaining wind they would not stem.<br/>

Brooding upon her face, the youth said, "Thou<br/>

Art not more beautiful than some of them,<br/>

But a fair courage crowns thy peaceful brow,<br/>

Nor glow thine eyes, but shine serene like gem<br/>

That lamps from radiant store upon the dark<br/>

The light it gathered where its song the lark.<br/>
</p>

<p>  "The horse that broke this day from grasp of three,<br/>

Thou sawest then the hand thou holdest, hold:<br/>

Ere two fleet hours are gone, that hand will be<br/>

Dry, big-veined, wrinkled, withered up and old!—<br/>

No woman yet hath shared my doom with me."<br/>

With calm fixed eyes she heard till he had told;<br/>

The stag-hounds rose, a moment gazed at him,<br/>

Then laid them down with aspect yet more grim.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Spake on the youth, nor altered look or tone:<br/>

"'Tis thy turn, maiden, to say no or dare."—<br/>

Was it the maiden's, that importunate moan?—<br/>

"At midnight, when the moon sets, wilt thou share<br/>

The terror with me? or must I go alone<br/>

To meet an agony that will not spare?"<br/>

She answered not, but rose to take her cloak;<br/>

He staid her with his hand, and further spoke.<br/>
</p>

<p>  "Not yet," he said; "yet there is respite; see,<br/>

Time's finger points not yet to the dead hour!<br/>

Enough is left even now for telling thee<br/>

The far beginnings whence the fearful power<br/>

Of the great dark came shadowing down on me:<br/>

Red roses crowding clothe my love's dear bower—<br/>

Nightshade and hemlock, darnel, toadstools white<br/>

Compass the place where I must lie to-night!"<br/>
</p>

<p>  Around his neck the maiden put her arm<br/>

And knelt beside him leaning on his breast,<br/>

As o'er his love, to keep it strong and warm,<br/>

Brooding like bird outspread upon her nest.<br/>

And well the faith of her dear eyes might charm<br/>

All doubt away from love's primeval rest!<br/>

He hid his face upon her heart, and there<br/>

Spake on with voice like wind from lonely lair.<br/>
</p>

<p>  A drearier moaning through the pine did go<br/>

As if a human voice complained and cried<br/>

For one long minute; then the sound grew low,<br/>

Sank to a sigh, and sighing sank and died.<br/>

Together at the silence two voices mow—<br/>

His, and the clock's, which, loud grown, did divide<br/>

The hours into live moments—sparks of time<br/>

Scorching the soul that trembles for the chime.<br/>
</p>

<p>  He spoke of sins ancestral, born in him<br/>

Impulses; of resistance fierce and wild;<br/>

Of failure weak, and strength reviving dim;<br/>

Self-hatred, dreariness no love beguiled;<br/>

Of storm, and blasting light, and darkness grim;<br/>

Of torrent paths, and tombs with mountains piled;<br/>

Of gulfs in the unsunned bosom of the earth;<br/>

Of dying ever into dawning birth.<br/>
</p>

<p>  "But when I find a heart whose blood is wine;<br/>

Whose faith lights up the cold brain's passionless hour;<br/>

Whose love, like unborn rose-bud, will not pine,<br/>

But waits the sun and the baptizing shower—<br/>

Till then lies hid, and gathers odours fine<br/>

To greet the human summer, when its flower<br/>

Shall blossom in the heart and soul and brain,<br/>

And love and passion be one holy twain—<br/>
</p>

<p>  "Then shall I rest, rest like the seven of yore;<br/>

Slumber divine will steep my outworn soul<br/>

And every stain dissolve to the very core.<br/>

She too will slumber, having found her goal.<br/>

Time's ocean o'er us will, in silence frore,<br/>

Aeonian tides of change-filled seasons roll,<br/>

And our long, dark, appointed period fill.<br/>

Then shall we wake together, loving still."<br/>
</p>

<p>  Her face on his, her mouth to his mouth pressed,<br/>

Was all the answer of the trusting maid.<br/>

Close in his arms he held her to his breast<br/>

For one brief moment—would have yet assayed<br/>

Some deeper word her heart to strengthen, lest<br/>

It should though faithful be too much afraid;<br/>

But the clock gave the warning to the hour—<br/>

And on the thatch fell sounds not of a shower.<br/>
</p>

<p>  One long kiss, and the maiden rose. A fear<br/>

Lay, thin as a glassy shadow, on her heart;<br/>

She trembled as some unknown thing were near,<br/>

But smiled next moment—for they should not part!<br/>

The youth arose. With solemn-joyous cheer,<br/>

He helped the maid, whose trembling hands did thwart<br/>

Her haste to wrap her in her mantle's fold;<br/>

Then out they passed into the midnight cold.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The moon was sinking in the dim green west,<br/>

Curled upward, half-way to the horizon's brink,<br/>

A leaf of glory falling to its rest,<br/>

The maiden's hand, still trembling, sought to link<br/>

Her arm to his, with love's instinctive quest,<br/>

But his enfolded her; hers did not sink,<br/>

But, thus set free, it stole his body round,<br/>

And so they walked, in freedom's fetters bound.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Pressed to his side, she felt, like full-toned bell,<br/>

A mighty heart heave large in measured play;<br/>

But as the floating moon aye lower fell<br/>

Its bounding force did, by slow loss, decay.<br/>

It throbbed now like a bird; now like far knell<br/>

Pulsed low and faint! And now, with sick dismay,<br/>

She felt the arm relax that round her clung,<br/>

And from her circling arm he forward hung.<br/>
</p>

<p>  His footsteps feeble, short his paces grow;<br/>

Her strength and courage mount and swell amain.<br/>

He lifted up his head: the moon lay low,<br/>

Nigh the world's edge. His lips with some keen pain<br/>

Quivered, but with a smile his eyes turned slow<br/>

Seeking in hers the balsam for his bane<br/>

And finding it—love over death supreme:<br/>

Like two sad souls they walked met in one dream.[A]<br/>
</p>

<p>[Note A:</p>

<p>In a lovely garden walking<br/>

  Two lovers went hand in hand;<br/>

Two wan, worn figures, talking<br/>

  They sat in the flowery land.<br/>
</p>

<p>On the cheek they kissed one another,<br/>

  On the mouth with sweet refrain;<br/>

Fast held they each the other,<br/>

  And were young and well again.<br/>
</p>

<p>Two little bells rang shrilly—<br/>

  The dream went with the hour:<br/>

She lay in the cloister stilly,<br/>

  He far in the dungeon-tower!<br/>
</p>

<p>      <i>From Uhland.</i>]</p>

<p>  Hanging his head, behind each came a hound,<br/>

Padding with gentle paws upon the road.<br/>

Straight silent pines rose here and there around;<br/>

A dull stream on the left side hardly flowed;<br/>

A black snake through the sluggish waters wound.<br/>

Hark, the night raven! see the crawling toad!<br/>

She thinks how dark will be the moonless night,<br/>

How feeblest ray is yet supernal light.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The moon's last gleam fell on dim glazed eyes,<br/>

A body shrunken from its garments' fold:<br/>

An aged man whose bent knees could not rise,<br/>

He tottered in the maiden's tightening hold.<br/>

She shivered, but too slight was the disguise<br/>

To hide from love what never yet was old;<br/>

She held him fast, with open eyes did pray,<br/>

Walked through the fear, and kept the onward way.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Toward a gloomy thicket of tall firs,<br/>

Dragging his inch-long steps, he turned aside.<br/>

There Silence sleeps; not one green needle stirs.<br/>

They enter it. A breeze begins to chide<br/>

Among the cones. It swells until it whirs,<br/>

Vibrating so each sharp leaf that it sighed:<br/>

The grove became a harp of mighty chords,<br/>

Wing-smote by unseen creatures wild for words.<br/>
</p>

<p>  But when he turned again, toward the cleft<br/>

Of a great rock, as instantly it ceased,<br/>

And the tall pines stood sudden, as if reft<br/>

Of a strong passion, or from pain released;<br/>

Again they wove their straight, dark, motionless weft<br/>

Across the moonset-bars; and, west and east,<br/>

Cloud-giants rose and marched up cloudy stairs;<br/>

And like sad thoughts the bats came unawares.<br/>
</p>

<p>  'Twas a drear chamber for thy bridal night,<br/>

O poor, pale, saviour bride! An earthen lamp<br/>

With shaking hands he kindled, whose faint light<br/>

Mooned out a tiny halo on the damp<br/>

That filled the cavern to its unseen height,<br/>

Dim glimmering like death-candle in a swamp.<br/>

Watching the entrance, each side lies a hound,<br/>

With liquid light his red eyes gleaming round.<br/>
</p>

<p>  A heap rose grave-like from the rocky floor<br/>

Of moss and leaves, by many a sunny wind<br/>

Long tossed and dried—with rich furs covered o'er<br/>

Expectant. Up a jealous glory shined<br/>

In her possessing heart: he should find more<br/>

In her than in those faithless! With sweet mind<br/>

She, praying gently, did herself unclothe,<br/>

And lay down by him, trusting, and not loath.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Once more a wind came, flapping overhead;<br/>

The hounds pricked up their ears, their eyes flashed fire.<br/>

The trembling maiden heard a sudden tread—<br/>

Dull, yet plain dinted on the windy gyre,<br/>

As if long, wet feet o'er smooth pavement sped—<br/>

Come fiercely up, as driven by longing dire<br/>

To enter; followed sounds of hurried rout:<br/>

With bristling hair, the hounds stood looking out.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Then came, half querulous, a whisper old,<br/>

Feeble and hollow as if shut in a chest:<br/>

"Take my face on your bosom; I am cold."<br/>

She bared her holy bosom's truth-white nest,<br/>

And forth her two hands instant went, love-bold,<br/>

And took the face, and close against her pressed:<br/>

Ah, the dead chill!—Was that the feet again?—<br/>

But her great heart kept beating for the twain.<br/>
</p>

<p>  She heard the wind fall, heard the following rain<br/>

Swelling the silent waters till their sound<br/>

Went wallowing through the night along the plain.<br/>

The lamp went out, by the slow darkness drowned.<br/>

Must the fair dawn a thousand years refrain?<br/>

Like centuries the feeble hours went round.<br/>

Eternal night entombed her with decay:<br/>

To her live soul she clasped the breathless clay.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The world stood still.  Her life sank down so low<br/>

That but for wretchedness no life she knew.<br/>

A charnel wind moaned out a moaning—<i>No</i>;<br/>

From the devouring heart of earth it blew.<br/>

Fair memories lost all their sunny glow:<br/>

Out of the dark the forms of old friends grew<br/>

But so transparent blanched with dole and smart<br/>

She saw the pale worm lying in each heart.<br/>
</p>

<p>  And, worst of all—Oh death of keep-fled life!<br/>

A voice within her woke and cried: In sooth<br/>

Vain is all sorrow, hope, and care, and strife!<br/>

Love and its beauty, its tenderness and truth<br/>

Are shadows bred in hearts too fancy-rife,<br/>

Which melt and pass with sure-decaying youth:<br/>

Regard them, and they quiver, waver, blot;<br/>

Gaze at them fixedly, and they are not.<br/>
</p>

<p>  And all the answer the poor child could make<br/>

Was in the tightened clasp of arms and hands.<br/>

Hopeless she lay, like one Death would not take<br/>

But still kept driving from his empty lands,<br/>

Yet hopeless held she out for his dear sake;<br/>

The darksome horror grew like drifting sands<br/>

Till nought was precious—neither God nor light,<br/>

And yet she braved the false, denying night.<br/>
</p>

<p>  So dead was hope, that, when a glimmer weak<br/>

Stole through a fissure somewhere in the cave,<br/>

Thinning the clotted darkness on his cheek,<br/>

She thought her own tired eyes the glimmer gave:<br/>

He moved his head; she saw his eyes, love-meek,<br/>

And knew that Death was dead and filled the Grave.<br/>

Old age, convicted lie, had fled away!<br/>

Youth, Youth eternal, in her bosom lay!<br/>
</p>

<p>  With a low cry closer to him she crept<br/>

And on his bosom hid a face that glowed:<br/>

It was his turn to comfort—he had slept!<br/>

Oh earth and sky, oh ever patient God,<br/>

She had not yielded, but the truth had kept!<br/>

New love, new bliss in weeping overflowed.<br/>

I can no farther tell the tale begun;<br/>

They are asleep, and waiting for the sun.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-prayer-for-the-past" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Prayer for the Past</h2>
<p>    <i>All sights and sounds of day and year,<br/>

  All groups and forms, each leaf and gem,<br/>

  Are thine, O God, nor will I fear<br/>

  To talk to thee of them</i>.<br/>
</p>

<p>      Too great thy heart is to despise,<br/>

  Whose day girds centuries about;<br/>

  From things which we name small, thine eyes<br/>

  See great things looking out.<br/>
</p>

<p>      Therefore the prayerful song I sing<br/>

  May come to thee in ordered words:<br/>

  Though lowly born, it needs not cling<br/>

  In terror to its chords.<br/>
</p>

<p>      I think that nothing made is lost;<br/>

  That not a moon has ever shone,<br/>

  That not a cloud my eyes hath crossed<br/>

  But to my soul is gone.<br/>
</p>

<p>      That all the lost years garnered lie<br/>

  In this thy casket, my dim soul;<br/>

  And thou wilt, once, the key apply,<br/>

  And show the shining whole.<br/>
</p>

<p>      <i>But were they dead in me, they live<br/>

  In thee, whose Parable is—Time,<br/>

  And Worlds, and Forms—all things that give<br/>

  Me thoughts, and this my rime</i>.<br/>
</p>

<p>      <i>And after what men call my death,<br/>

  When I have crossed the unknown sea,<br/>

  Some heavenly morn, on hopeful breath,<br/>

  Shall rise this prayer to thee</i>.<br/>
</p>

<p>      Oh let me be a child once more,<br/>

  And dream fine glories in the gloom,<br/>

  Of sun and moon and stars in store<br/>

  To ceil my humble room.<br/>
</p>

<p>      Oh call again the moons that crossed<br/>

  Blue gulfs, behind gray vapours crept;<br/>

  Show me the solemn skies I lost<br/>

  Because in thee I slept.<br/>
</p>

<p>      Once more let gathering glory swell,<br/>

  And lift the world's dim eastern eye;<br/>

  Once more let lengthening shadows tell<br/>

  Its time is come to die.<br/>
</p>

<p>      But show me first—oh, blessed sight!<br/>

  The lowly house where I was young;<br/>

  There winter sent wild winds at night,<br/>

  And up the snow-heaps flung;<br/>
</p>

<p>      Or soundless brought a chaos fair,<br/>

  Full, formless, of fantastic forms,<br/>

  White ghostly trees in sparkling air—<br/>

  Chamber for slumbering storms.<br/>
</p>

<p>      There sudden dawned a dewy morn;<br/>

  A man was turning up the mould;<br/>

  And in our hearts the spring was born,<br/>

  Crept thither through the cold.<br/>
</p>

<p>      <i>And Spring, in after years of youth,<br/>

  Became the form of every form<br/>

  For hearts now bursting into truth,<br/>

  Now sighing in the storm</i>.<br/>
</p>

<p>      On with the glad year let me go,<br/>

  With troops of daisies round my feet;<br/>

  Flying my kite, or, in the glow<br/>

  Of arching summer heat,<br/>
</p>

<p>      Outstretched in fear upon a bank,<br/>

  Lest, gazing up on awful space,<br/>

  I should fall down into the blank,<br/>

  From off the round world's face.<br/>
</p>

<p>      And let my brothers come with me<br/>

  To play our old games yet again,<br/>

  Children on earth, more full of glee<br/>

  That we in heaven are men.<br/>
</p>

<p>      If then should come the shadowy death,<br/>

  Take one of us and go,<br/>

  We left would say, under our breath,<br/>

  "It is a dream, you know!"<br/>
</p>

<p>      "And in the dream our brother's gone<br/>

  Upstairs: he heard our father call;<br/>

  For one by one we go alone,<br/>

  Till he has gathered all."<br/>
</p>

<p>      <i>Father, in joy our knees we bow:<br/>

  This earth is not a place of tombs:<br/>

  We are but in the nursery now;<br/>

  They in the upper rooms</i>.<br/>
</p>

<p>      For are we not at home in thee,<br/>

  And all this world a visioned show;<br/>

  That, knowing what Abroad is, we<br/>

  What Home is too may know?<br/>
</p>

<p>      <i>And at thy feet I sit, O Lord,<br/>

  As once of old, in moonlight pale,<br/>

  I at my father's sat, and heard<br/>

  Him read a lofty tale</i>.<br/>
</p>

<p>      On with my history let me go,<br/>

  And reap again the gliding years,<br/>

  Gather great noontide's joyous glow,<br/>

  Eve's love-contented tears;<br/>
</p>

<p>      One afternoon sit pondering<br/>

  In that old chair, in that old room,<br/>

  Where passing pigeon's sudden wing<br/>

  Flashed lightning through the gloom;<br/>
</p>

<p>      There try once more, with effort vain,<br/>

  To mould in one perplexed things;<br/>

  There find the solace yet again<br/>

  Hope in the Father brings;<br/>
</p>

<p>      Or mount and ride in sun and wind,<br/>

  Through desert moors, hills bleak and high,<br/>

  Where wandering vapours fall, and find<br/>

  In me another sky!<br/>
</p>

<p>      <i>For so thy Visible grew mine,<br/>

  Though half its power I could not know;<br/>

  And in me wrought a work divine,<br/>

  Which thou hadst ordered so</i>;<br/>
</p>

<p>     Giving me cups that would not spill,<br/>

  But water carry and yield again;<br/>

  New bottles with new wine to fill<br/>

  For comfort of thy men.<br/>
</p>

<p>      But if thou thus restore the past<br/>

  One hour, for me to wander in,<br/>

  I now bethink me at the last—<br/>

  O Lord, leave out the sin.<br/>
</p>

<p>      <i>And with the thought comes doubt, my God:<br/>

  Shall I the whole desire to see,<br/>

  And walk once more, of that hill-road<br/>

  By which I went to thee</i>?<br/>
</p>

<h2>A PRAYER FOR THE PAST.</h2>

<p>    <i>Now far from my old northern land,<br/>

  I live where gentle winters pass;<br/>

  Where green seas lave a wealthy strand,<br/>

  And unsown is the grass</i>;<br/>
</p>

<p>      Where gorgeous sunsets claim the scope<br/>

  Of gazing heaven to spread their show,<br/>

  Hang scarlet clouds in the topmost cope,<br/>

  With fringes flaming low;<br/>
</p>

<p>      With one beside me in whose eyes<br/>

  Once more old Nature finds a home;<br/>

  There treasures up her changeful skies,<br/>

  Her phosphorescent foam.<br/>
</p>

<p>      O'er a new joy this day we bend,<br/>

  Soft power from heaven our souls to lift;<br/>

  A wondering wonder thou dost lend<br/>

  With loan outpassing gift—<br/>
</p>

<p>      A little child. She sees the sun—<br/>

  Once more incarnates thy old law:<br/>

  One born of two, two born in one,<br/>

  Shall into one three draw.<br/>
</p>

<p>      But is there no day creeping on<br/>

  Which I should tremble to renew?<br/>

  I thank thee, Lord, for what is gone—<br/>

  Thine is the future too!<br/>
</p>

<p>      <i>And are we not at home in Thee,<br/>

  And all this world a visioned show,<br/>

  That, knowing what Abroad is, we<br/>

  What Home is too may know</i>?<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="far-and-near" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Far and Near</h2>
<p><i>FAR AND NEAR</i>.
[The fact which suggested this poem is related by Clarke in his Travels.]</p>

<h5>I.</h5>

<p>Blue sky above, blue sea below,<br/>

  Far off, the old Nile's mouth,<br/>

'Twas a blue world, wherein did blow<br/>

  A soft wind from the south.<br/>
</p>

<p>In great and solemn heaves the mass<br/>

  Of pulsing ocean beat,<br/>

Unwrinkled as the sea of glass<br/>

  Beneath the holy feet.<br/>
</p>

<p>With forward leaning of desire<br/>

  The ship sped calmly on,<br/>

A pilgrim strong that would not tire<br/>

  Or hasten to be gone.<br/>
</p>

<h5>II.</h5>

<p>List!—on the wave!—what can they be,<br/>

  Those sounds that hither glide?<br/>

No lovers whisper tremulously<br/>

  Under the ship's round side!<br/>
</p>

<p>No sail across the dark blue sphere<br/>

  Holds white obedient way;<br/>

No far-fled, sharp-winged boat is near,<br/>

  No following fish at play!<br/>
</p>

<p>'Tis not the rippling of the wave,<br/>

  Nor sighing of the cords;<br/>

No winds or waters ever gave<br/>

  A murmur so like words;<br/>
</p>

<p>Nor wings of birds that northward strain,<br/>

  Nor talk of hidden crew:<br/>

The traveller questioned, but in vain—<br/>

  He found no answer true.<br/>
</p>

<h5>III.</h5>

<p>A hundred level miles away,<br/>

  On Egypt's troubled shore,<br/>

Two nations fought, that sunny day,<br/>

  With bellowing cannons' roar.<br/>
</p>

<p>The fluttering whisper, low and near,<br/>

  Was that far battle's blare;<br/>

A lipping, rippling motion here,<br/>

  The blasting thunder there.<br/>
</p>

<h5>IV.</h5>

<p>Can this dull sighing in my breast<br/>

  So faint and undefined,<br/>

Be the worn edge of far unrest<br/>

  Borne on the spirit's wind?<br/>
</p>

<p>The uproar of high battle fought<br/>

  Betwixt the bond and free,<br/>

The thunderous roll of armed thought<br/>

  Dwarfed to an ache in me?<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="my-room" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">My Room</h2>
<p>To G. E. M.</p>

<p>  'Tis a little room, my friend—<br/>

Baby walks from end to end;<br/>

All the things look sadly real<br/>

This hot noontide unideal;<br/>

Vaporous heat from cope to basement<br/>

All you see outside the casement,<br/>

Save one house all mud-becrusted,<br/>

And a street all drought-bedusted!<br/>

There behold its happiest vision,<br/>

Trickling water-cart's derision!<br/>

Shut we out the staring space,<br/>

Draw the curtains in its face!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Close the eyelids of the room,<br/>

Fill it with a scarlet gloom:<br/>

Lo, the walls with warm flush dyed!<br/>

Lo, the ceiling glorified,<br/>

As when, lost in tenderest pinks,<br/>

White rose on the red rose thinks!<br/>

But beneath, a hue right rosy,<br/>

Red as a geranium-posy,<br/>

Stains the air with power estranging,<br/>

Known with unknown clouding, changing.<br/>

See in ruddy atmosphere<br/>

Commonplaceness disappear!<br/>

Look around on either hand—<br/>

Are we not in fairyland?<br/>
</p>

<p>  On that couch, inwrapt in mist<br/>

Of vaporized amethyst,<br/>

Lie, as in a rose's heart:<br/>

Secret things I would impart;<br/>

Any time you would believe them—<br/>

Easier, though, you will receive them<br/>

Bathed in glowing mystery<br/>

Of the red light shadowy;<br/>

For this ruby-hearted hue,<br/>

Sanguine core of all the true,<br/>

Which for love the heart would plunder<br/>

Is the very hue of wonder;<br/>

This dissolving dreamy red<br/>

Is the self-same radiance shed<br/>

From the heart of poet young,<br/>

Glowing poppy sunlight-stung:<br/>

If in light you make a schism<br/>

'Tis the deepest in the prism.<br/>
</p>

<p>  This poor-seeming room, in fact<br/>

Is of marvels all compact,<br/>

So disguised by common daylight<br/>

By its disenchanting gray light,<br/>

Only eyes that see by shining,<br/>

Inside pierce to its live lining.<br/>

Loftiest observatory<br/>

Ne'er unveiled such hidden glory;<br/>

Never sage's furnace-kitchen<br/>

Magic wonders was so rich in;<br/>

Never book of wizard old<br/>

Clasped such in its iron hold.<br/>
</p>

<p>  See that case against the wall,<br/>

Darkly-dull-purpureal!—<br/>

A piano to the prosy,<br/>

But to us in twilight rosy—<br/>

What?—A cave where Nereids lie,<br/>

Naiads, Dryads, Oreads sigh,<br/>

Dreaming of the time when they<br/>

Danced in forest and in bay.<br/>

In that chest before your eyes<br/>

Nature self-enchanted lies;—<br/>

Lofty days of summer splendour;<br/>

Low dim eves of opal tender;<br/>

Airy hunts of cloud and wind;<br/>

Brooding storm—below, behind;<br/>

Awful hills and midnight woods;<br/>

Sunny rains in solitudes;<br/>

Babbling streams in forests hoar;<br/>

Seven-hued icebergs; oceans frore.—<br/>

Yes; did I not say <i>enchanted</i>,<br/>

That is, hid away till wanted?<br/>

Do you hear a low-voiced singing?<br/>

'Tis the sorceress's, flinging<br/>

Spells around her baby's riot,<br/>

Binding her in moveless quiet:—<br/>

She at will can disenchant them,<br/>

And to prayer believing grant them.<br/>
</p>

<p>  You believe me: soon will night<br/>

Free her hands for fair delight;<br/>

Then invoke her—she will come.<br/>

Fold your arms, be blind and dumb.<br/>

She will bring a book of spells<br/>

Writ like crabbed oracles;<br/>

Like Sabrina's will her hands<br/>

Thaw the power of charmed bands.<br/>

First will ransomed music rush<br/>

Round thee in a glorious gush;<br/>

Next, upon its waves will sally,<br/>

Like a stream-god down a valley,<br/>

Nature's self, the formless former,<br/>

Nature's self, the peaceful stormer;<br/>

She will enter, captive take thee,<br/>

And both one and many make thee,<br/>

One by softest power to still thee,<br/>

Many by the thoughts that fill thee.—<br/>

Let me guess three guesses where<br/>

She her prisoner will bear!<br/>
</p>

<p>  On a mountain-top you stand<br/>

Gazing o'er a sunny land;<br/>

Shining streams, like silver veins,<br/>

Rise in dells and meet in plains;<br/>

Up yon brook a hollow lies<br/>

Dumb as love that fears surprise;<br/>

Moorland tracts of broken ground<br/>

O'er it rise and close it round:<br/>

He who climbs from bosky dale<br/>

Hears the foggy breezes wail.<br/>

Yes, thou know'st the nest of love,<br/>

Know'st the waste around, above!<br/>

In thy soul or in thy past,<br/>

Straight it melts into the vast,<br/>

Quickly vanishes away<br/>

In a gloom of darkening gray.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Sinks the sadness into rest,<br/>

Ripple like on water's breast:<br/>

Mother's bosom rests the daughter—<br/>

Grief the ripple, love the water;<br/>

And thy brain like wind-harp lies<br/>

Breathed upon from distant skies,<br/>

Till, soft-gathering, visions new<br/>

Grow like vapours in the blue:<br/>

White forms, flushing hyacinthine,<br/>

Move in motions labyrinthine;<br/>

With an airy wishful gait<br/>

On the counter-motion wait;<br/>

Sweet restraint and action free<br/>

Show the law of liberty;<br/>

Master of the revel still<br/>

The obedient, perfect will;<br/>

Hating smallest thing awry,<br/>

Breathing, breeding harmony;<br/>

While the god-like graceful feet,<br/>

For such mazy marvelling meet,<br/>

Press from air a shining sound,<br/>

Rippling after, lingering round:<br/>

Hair afloat and arms aloft<br/>

Fill the chord of movement soft.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Gone the measure polyhedral!<br/>

Towers aloft a fair cathedral!<br/>

Every arch—like praying arms<br/>

Upward flung in love's alarms,<br/>

Knit by clasped hands o'erhead—<br/>

Heaves to heaven a weight of dread;<br/>

In thee, like an angel-crowd,<br/>

Grows the music, praying loud,<br/>

Swells thy spirit with devotion<br/>

As a strong wind swells the ocean,<br/>

Sweeps the visioned pile away,<br/>

Leaves thy heart alone to pray.<br/>
</p>

<p>  As the prayer grows dim and dies<br/>

Like a sunset from the skies,<br/>

Glides another change of mood<br/>

O'er thy inner solitude:<br/>

Girt with Music's magic zone,<br/>

Lo, thyself magician grown!<br/>

Open-eyed thou walk'st through earth<br/>

Brooding on the aeonian birth<br/>

Of a thousand wonder-things<br/>

In divine dusk of their springs:<br/>

Half thou seest whence they flow,<br/>

Half thou seest whither go—<br/>

Nature's consciousness, whereby<br/>

On herself she turns her eye,<br/>

Hoping for all men and thee<br/>

Perfected, pure harmony.<br/>
</p>

<p>  But when, sinking slow, the sun<br/>

Leaves the glowing curtain dun,<br/>

I, of prophet-insight reft,<br/>

Shall be dull and dreamless left;<br/>

I must hasten proof on proof,<br/>

Weaving in the warp my woof!<br/>
</p>

<p>  What are those upon the wall,<br/>

Ranged in rows symmetrical?<br/>

Through the wall of things external<br/>

Posterns they to the supernal;<br/>

Through Earth's battlemented height<br/>

Loopholes to the Infinite;<br/>

Through locked gates of place and time,<br/>

Wickets to the eternal prime<br/>

Lying round the noisy day<br/>

Full of silences alway.<br/>
</p>

<p>  That, my friend? Now, it is curious<br/>

You should hit upon the spurious!<br/>

'Tis a door to nowhere, that;<br/>

Never soul went in thereat;<br/>

Lies behind, a limy wall<br/>

Hung with cobwebs, that is all.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Do not open that one yet,<br/>

Wait until the sun is set.<br/>

If you careless lift its latch<br/>

Glimpse of nothing will you catch;<br/>

Mere negation, blank of hue,<br/>

Out of it will stare at you;<br/>

Wait, I say, the coming night,<br/>

Fittest time for second sight,<br/>

Then the wide eyes of the mind<br/>

See far down the Spirit's wind.<br/>

You may have to strain and pull,<br/>

Force and lift with cunning tool,<br/>

Ere the rugged, ill-joined door<br/>

Yield the sight it stands before:<br/>

When at last, with grating sweep,<br/>

Wide it swings—behold, the deep!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Thou art standing on the verge<br/>

Where material things emerge;<br/>

Hoary silence, lightning fleet,<br/>

Shooteth hellward at thy feet!<br/>

Fear not thou whose life is truth,<br/>

Gazing will renew thy youth;<br/>

But where sin of soul or flesh<br/>

Held a man in spider-mesh,<br/>

It would drag him through that door,<br/>

Give him up to loreless lore,<br/>

Ages to be blown and hurled<br/>

Up and down a deedless world.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Ah, your eyes ask how I brook<br/>

Doors that are not, doors to look!<br/>

That is whither I was tending,<br/>

And it brings me to good ending.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Baby is the cause of this;<br/>

Odd it seems, but so it is;—<br/>

Baby, with her pretty prate<br/>

Molten, half articulate,<br/>

Full of hints, suggestions, catches,<br/>

Broken verse, and music snatches!<br/>

She, like seraph gone astray,<br/>

Must be shown the homeward way;<br/>

Plant of heaven, she, rooted lowly,<br/>

Must put forth a blossom holy,<br/>

Must, through culture high and steady,<br/>

Slow unfold a gracious lady;<br/>

She must therefore live in wonder,<br/>

See nought common up or under;<br/>

She the moon and stars and sea,<br/>

Worm and butterfly and bee,<br/>

Yea, the sparkle in a stone,<br/>

Must with marvel look upon;<br/>

She must love, in heaven's own blueness,<br/>

Both the colour and the newness;<br/>

Must each day from darkness break,<br/>

Often often come awake,<br/>

Never with her childhood part,<br/>

Change the brain, but keep the heart.<br/>
</p>

<p>  So, from lips and hands and looks,<br/>

She must learn to honour books,<br/>

Turn the leaves with careful fingers,<br/>

Never lean where long she lingers;<br/>

But when she is old enough<br/>

She must learn the lesson rough<br/>

That to seem is not to be,<br/>

As to know is not to see;<br/>

That to man or book, <i>appearing</i><br/>

Gives no title to revering;<br/>

That a pump is not a well,<br/>

Nor a priest an oracle:<br/>

This to leave safe in her mind,<br/>

I will take her and go find<br/>

Certain no-books, dreary apes,<br/>

Tell her they are mere mock-shapes<br/>

No more to be honoured by her<br/>

But be laid upon the fire;<br/>

Book-appearance must not hinder<br/>

Their consuming to a cinder.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Would you see the small immortal<br/>

One short pace within Time's portal?<br/>

I will fetch her.—Is she white?<br/>

Solemn? true? a light in light?<br/>

See! is not her lily-skin<br/>

White as whitest ermelin<br/>

Washed in palest thinnest rose?<br/>

Very thought of God she goes,<br/>

Ne'er to wander, in her dance,<br/>

Out of his love-radiance!<br/>
</p>

<p>  But, my friend, I've rattled plenty<br/>

To suffice for mornings twenty!<br/>

I should never stop of course,<br/>

Therefore stop I will perforce.—<br/>

If I led them up, choragic,<br/>

To reveal their nature magic,<br/>

Twenty things, past contradiction,<br/>

Yet would prove I spoke no fiction<br/>

Of the room's belongings cryptic<br/>

Read by light apocalyptic:<br/>

There is that strange thing, glass-masked,<br/>

With continual questions tasked,<br/>

Ticking with untiring rock:<br/>

It is called an eight-day clock,<br/>

But to me the thing appears<br/>

Busy winding up the years,<br/>

Drawing on with coiling chain<br/>

The epiphany again.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="sympathy" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Sympathy</h2>
<p>  Grief held me silent in my seat;<br/>

      I neither moved nor smiled:<br/>

  Joy held her silent at my feet,<br/>

      My shining lily-child.<br/>
</p>

<p>  She raised her face and looked in mine;<br/>

      She deemed herself denied;<br/>

  The door was shut, there was no shine;<br/>

      Poor she was left outside!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Once, twice, three times, with infant grace<br/>

      Her lips my name did mould;<br/>

  Her face was pulling at my face—<br/>

      She was but ten months old.<br/>
</p>

<p>  I saw; the sight rebuked my sighs;<br/>

      It made me think—Does God<br/>

  Need help from his poor children's eyes<br/>

      To ease him of his load?<br/>
</p>

<p>  Ah, if he did, how seldom then<br/>

      The Father would be glad!<br/>

  If comfort lay in the eyes of men,<br/>

      He little comfort had!<br/>
</p>

<p>  We cry to him in evil case,<br/>

      When comfort sore we lack;<br/>

  And when we troubled seek his face,<br/>

      Consoled he sends us back;<br/>
</p>

<p>  Nor waits for prayer to rise and climb—<br/>

      He wakes the sleeping prayer;<br/>

  He is our father all the time,<br/>

      And servant everywhere.<br/>
</p>

<p>  I looked not up; foreboding hid<br/>

      Kept down my heart the while;<br/>

  'Twas he looked up; my Father did<br/>

      Smile in my infant's smile.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="little-elfie" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Little Elfie</h2>
<p>  I have a puppet-jointed child,<br/>

    She's but three half-years old;<br/>

  Through lawless hair her eyes gleam wild<br/>

    With looks both shy and bold.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Like little imps, her tiny hands<br/>

    Dart out and push and take;<br/>

  Chide her—a trembling thing she stands,<br/>

    And like two leaves they shake.<br/>
</p>

<p>  But to her mind a minute gone<br/>

    Is like a year ago;<br/>

  And when you lift your eyes anon,<br/>

    Anon you must say <i>No</i>!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Sometimes, though not oppressed with care,<br/>

    She has her sleepless fits;<br/>

  Then, blanket-swathed, in that round chair<br/>

    The elfish mortal sits;—<br/>
</p>

<p>  Where, if by chance in mood more grave,<br/>

    A hermit she appears<br/>

  Propped in the opening of his cave,<br/>

    Mummied almost with years;<br/>
</p>

<p>  Or like an idol set upright<br/>

    With folded legs for stem,<br/>

  Ready to hear prayers all the night<br/>

    And never answer them.<br/>
</p>

<p>  But where's the idol-hermit thrust?<br/>

    Her knees like flail-joints go!<br/>

  Alternate kiss, her mother must,<br/>

    Now that, now this big toe!<br/>
</p>

<p>  I turn away from her, and write<br/>

    For minutes three or four:<br/>

  A tiny spectre, tall and white,<br/>

    She's standing by the door!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Then something comes into my head<br/>

    That makes me stop and think:<br/>

  She's on the table, the quadruped,<br/>

    And dabbling in my ink!<br/>
</p>

<p>  O Elfie, make no haste to lose<br/>

    Thy ignorance of offence!<br/>

  Thou hast the best gift I could choose,<br/>

    A heavenly confidence.<br/>
</p>

<p>  'Tis time, long-white-gowned Mrs. Ham,<br/>

    To put you in the ark!<br/>

  Sleep, Elfie, God-infolded lamb,<br/>

    Sleep shining through the dark.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-thank-offering" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Thank-Offering</h2>
<p>  My Lily snatches not my gift;<br/>

      Glad is she to be fed,<br/>

  But to her mouth she will not lift<br/>

      The piece of broken bread,<br/>

  Till on my lips, unerring, swift,<br/>

      The morsel she has laid.<br/>
</p>

<p>  This is her grace before her food,<br/>

      This her libation poured;<br/>

  Even thus his offering, Aaron good<br/>

      Heaved up to thank the Lord,<br/>

  When for the people all he stood,<br/>

      And with a cake adored.<br/>
</p>

<p>  So, Father, every gift of thine<br/>

      I offer at thy knee;<br/>

  Else take I not the love divine<br/>

      With which it comes to me;<br/>

  Not else the offered grace is mine<br/>

      Of sharing life with thee.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Yea, all my being I would bring,<br/>

      Yielding it utterly,<br/>

  Not yet a full-possessed thing<br/>

      Till heaved again to thee:<br/>

  Away, my self! away, and cling<br/>

      To him that makes thee be!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-burnt-offering" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Burnt-Offering</h2>
<p>  Thrice-happy he whose heart, each new-born night,<br/>

  When old-worn day hath vanished o'er earth's brim,<br/>

  And he hath laid him down in chamber dim,<br/>

  Straightway begins to tremble and grow bright,<br/>

  And loose faint flashes toward the vaulted height<br/>

  Of the great peace that overshadoweth him:<br/>

  Keen lambent flames of hope awake and swim<br/>

  Throughout his soul, touching each point with light!<br/>

  The great earth under him an altar is,<br/>

  Upon whose top a sacrifice he lies,<br/>

  Burning in love's response up to the skies<br/>

  Whose fire descended first and kindled his:<br/>

  When slow the flickering flames at length expire,<br/>

  Sleep's ashes only hide a glowing fire.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-s-f-s" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To S. F. S.</h2>
<p>  They say that lonely sorrows do not chance:<br/>

  More gently, I think, sorrows together go;<br/>

  A new one joins the funeral gliding slow<br/>

  With less of jar than when it breaks the dance.<br/>

  Grief swages grief, and joy doth joy enhance;<br/>

  Nature is generous to her children so.<br/>

  And were they quick to spy the flowers that blow,<br/>

  As quick to feel the sharp-edged stones that lance<br/>

  The foot that must walk naked in life's way,—<br/>

  Blest by the roadside lily, free from fear,<br/>

  Oftener than hurt by dash of flinty spear,<br/>

  They would walk upright, bold, and earnest-gay;<br/>

  And when the soft night closed the weary day,<br/>

  Would sleep like those that far-off music hear.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-unseen-face" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Unseen Face</h2>
<p<br/>

  "Come up to me in Sinai on the morn!<br/>

  Thou shall behold as much as may be borne."<br/>

  And on a rock stood Moses, lone in space.<br/>

  From Sinai's top, the vaporous, thunderous place,<br/>

  God passed in cloud, an earthy garment worn<br/>

  To hide, and thus reveal. In love, not scorn,<br/>

  He put him in a clift of the rock's base,<br/>

  Covered him with his hand, his eyes to screen—<br/>

  Passed—lifted it: his back alone appears!<br/>

  Ah, Moses, had he turned, and hadst thou seen<br/>

  The pale face crowned with thorns, baptized with tears,<br/>

  The eyes of the true man, by men belied,<br/>

  Thou hadst beheld God's face, and straightway died!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="concerning-jesus" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Concerning Jesus</h2>
<h4>  I.</h4>

<p>  If thou hadst been a sculptor, what a race<br/>

  Of forms divine had thenceforth filled the land!<br/>

  Methinks I see thee, glorious workman, stand,<br/>

  Striking a marble window through blind space—<br/>

  Thy face's reflex on the coming face,<br/>

  As dawns the stone to statue 'neath thy hand—<br/>

  Body obedient to its soul's command,<br/>

  Which is thy thought, informing it with grace!<br/>

  So had it been. But God, who quickeneth clay,<br/>

  Nor turneth it to marble—maketh eyes,<br/>

  Not shadowy hollows, where no sunbeams play—<br/>

  Would mould his loftiest thought in human guise:<br/>

  Thou didst appear, walking unknown abroad,<br/>

  God's living sculpture, all-informed of God.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  II.</h4>

<p>  If one should say, "Lo, there thy statue! take<br/>

  Possession, sculptor; now inherit it;<br/>

  Go forth upon the earth in likeness fit;<br/>

  As with a trumpet-cry at morning, wake<br/>

  The sleeping nations; with light's terror, shake<br/>

  The slumber from their hearts, that, where they sit,<br/>

  They leap straight up, aghast, as at a pit<br/>

  Gaping beneath;" I hear him answer make:<br/>

  "Alas for me, I cannot nor would dare<br/>

  Inform what I revered as I did trace!<br/>

  Who would be fool that he like fool might fare,<br/>

  With feeble spirit mocking the enorm<br/>

  Strength on his forehead!" Thou, God's thought thy form,<br/>

  Didst live the large significance of thy face.<br/>
</p>

<h3>  III.</h3>

<p>  Men have I seen, and seen with wonderment,<br/>

  Noble in form, "lift upward and divine,"<br/>

  In whom I yet must search, as in a mine,<br/>

  After that soul of theirs, by which they went<br/>

  Alive upon the earth. And I have bent<br/>

  Regard on many a woman, who gave sign<br/>

  God willed her beautiful, when he drew the line<br/>

  That shaped each float and fold of beauty's tent:<br/>

  Her soul, alas, chambered in pigmy space,<br/>

  Left the fair visage pitiful—inane—<br/>

  Poor signal only of a coming face<br/>

  When from the penetrale she filled the fane!—<br/>

  Possessed of thee was every form of thine,<br/>

  Thy very hair replete with the divine.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  IV.</h4>

<p>  If thou hadst built a temple, how my eye<br/>

  Had hungering fed thereon, from low-browed crypt<br/>

  Up to the soaring pinnacles that, tipt<br/>

  With stars, gave signal when the sun drew nigh!<br/>

  Dark caverns in and under; vivid sky<br/>

  Its home and aim! Say, from the glory slipt,<br/>

  And down into the shadows dropt and dipt,<br/>

  Or reared from darkness up so holy-high?—<br/>

  Thou build'st the temple of thy holy ghost<br/>

  From hid foundation to high-hidden fate—<br/>

  Foot in the grave, head at the heavenly gate,<br/>

  From grave and sky filled with a fighting host!<br/>

  Man is thy temple; man thy work elect;<br/>

  His glooms and glory thine, great architect!<br/>
</p>

<h4>  V.</h4>

<p>  If thou hadst been a painter, what fresh looks,<br/>

  What outbursts of pent glories, what new grace<br/>

  Had shone upon us from the great world's face!<br/>

  How had we read, as in eternal books,<br/>

  The love of God in loneliest shiest nooks!<br/>

  A lily, in merest lines thy hand did trace,<br/>

  Had plainly been God's child of lower race!<br/>

  And oh how strong the hills, songful the brooks!<br/>

  To thee all nature's meanings lie light-bare,<br/>

  Because thy heart is nature's inner side;<br/>

  Clear as, to us, earth on the dawn's gold tide,<br/>

  Her notion vast up in thy soul did rise;<br/>

  Thine is the world, thine all its splendours rare,<br/>

  Thou Man ideal, with the unsleeping eyes!<br/>
</p>

<h4>  VI.</h4>

<p>  But I have seen pictures the work of man,<br/>

  In which at first appeared but chaos wild:<br/>

  So high the art transcended, they beguiled<br/>

  The eye as formless, and without a plan.<br/>

  Not soon, the spirit, brooding o'er, began<br/>

  To see a purpose rise, like mountain isled,<br/>

  When God said, Let the Dry appear! and, piled<br/>

  Above the waves, it rose in twilight wan.<br/>

  So might thy pictures then have been too strange<br/>

  For us to pierce beyond their outmost look;<br/>

  A vapour and a darkness; a sealed book;<br/>

  An atmosphere too high for wings to range;<br/>

  And so we could but, gazing, pale and change,<br/>

  And tremble as at a void thought cannot brook.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  VII.</h4>

<p>  But earth is now thy living picture, where<br/>

  Thou shadowest truth, the simple and profound<br/>

  By the same form in vital union bound:<br/>

  Where one can see but the first step of thy stair,<br/>

  Another sees it vanish far in air.<br/>

  When thy king David viewed the starry round,<br/>

  From heart and fingers broke the psaltery-sound:<br/>

  Lord, what is man, that thou shouldst mind his prayer!<br/>

  But when the child beholds the heavens on high,<br/>

  He babbles childish noises—not less dear<br/>

  Than what the king sang praying—to the ear<br/>

  Of him who made the child and king and sky.<br/>

  Earth is thy picture, painter great, whose eye<br/>

  Sees with the child, sees with the kingly seer.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  VIII.</h4>

<p>  If thou hadst built some mighty instrument,<br/>

  And set thee down to utter ordered sound,<br/>

  Whose faithful billows, from thy hands unbound,<br/>

  Breaking in light, against our spirits went,<br/>

  And caught, and bore above this earthly tent,<br/>

  The far-strayed back to their prime natal ground,<br/>

  Where all roots fast in harmony are found,<br/>

  And God sits thinking out a pure consent;—<br/>

  Nay, that thou couldst not; that was not for thee!<br/>

  Our broken music thou must first restore—<br/>

  A harder task than think thine own out free;<br/>

  And till thou hast done it, no divinest score,<br/>

  Though rendered by thine own angelic choir,<br/>

  Can lift one human spirit from the mire.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  IX.</h4>

<p>  If thou hadst been a poet! On my heart<br/>

  The thought flashed sudden, burning through the weft<br/>

  Of life, and with too much I sank bereft.<br/>

  Up to my eyes the tears, with sudden start,<br/>

  Thronged blinding: then the veil would rend and part!<br/>

  The husk of vision would in twain be cleft!<br/>

  Thy hidden soul in naked beauty left,<br/>

  I should behold thee, Nature, as thou art!<br/>

  O poet Jesus! at thy holy feet<br/>

  I should have lien, sainted with listening;<br/>

  My pulses answering ever, in rhythmic beat,<br/>

  The stroke of each triumphant melody's wing,<br/>

  Creating, as it moved, my being sweet;<br/>

  My soul thy harp, thy word the quivering string.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  X.</h4>

<p>  Thee had we followed through the twilight land<br/>

  Where thought grows form, and matter is refined<br/>

  Back into thought of the eternal mind,<br/>

  Till, seeing them one, Lo, in the morn we stand!—<br/>

  Then started fresh and followed, hand in hand,<br/>

  With sense divinely growing, till, combined,<br/>

  We heard the music of the planets wind<br/>

  In harmony with billows on the strand!—<br/>

  Till, one with earth and all God's utterance,<br/>

  We hardly knew whether the sun outspake,<br/>

  Or a glad sunshine from our spirits brake—<br/>

  Whether we think, or winds and blossoms dance!<br/>

  Alas, O poet leader, for such good<br/>

  Thou wast God's tragedy, writ in tears and blood!<br/>
</p>

<h4>  XI.</h4>

<p>  Hadst thou been one of these, in many eyes,<br/>

  Too near to be a glory for thy sheen,<br/>

  Thou hadst been scorned; and to the best hadst been<br/>

  A setter forth of strange divinities;<br/>

  But to the few construct of harmonies,<br/>

  A sudden sun, uplighting the serene<br/>

  High heaven of love; and, through the cloudy screen<br/>

  That 'twixt our souls and truth all wretched lies,<br/>

  Dawning at length, hadst been a love and fear,<br/>

  Worshipped on high from Magian's mountain-crest,<br/>

  And all night long symbolled by lamp-flames clear,<br/>

  Thy sign, a star upon thy people's breast—<br/>

  Where that strange arbitrary token lies<br/>

  Which once did scare the sun in noontide skies.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  XII.</h4>

<p>  But as thou camest forth to bring the poor,<br/>

  Whose hearts are nearer faith and verity,<br/>

  Spiritual childhood, thy philosophy—<br/>

  So taught'st the A B C of heavenly lore;<br/>

  Because thou sat'st not lonely evermore,<br/>

  With mighty truths informing language high,<br/>

  But, walking in thy poem continually,<br/>

  Didst utter deeds, of all true forms the core—<br/>

  Poet and poem one indivisible fact;<br/>

  Because thou didst thine own ideal act,<br/>

  And so, for parchment, on the human soul<br/>

  Didst write thine aspirations—at thy goal<br/>

  Thou didst arrive with curses for acclaim,<br/>

  And cry to God up through a cloud of shame.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  XIII.</h4>

<p>  For three and thirty years, a living seed,<br/>

  A lonely germ, dropt on our waste world's side,<br/>

  Thy death and rising thou didst calmly bide;<br/>

  Sore companied by many a clinging weed<br/>

  Sprung from the fallow soil of evil and need;<br/>

  Hither and thither tossed, by friends denied;<br/>

  Pitied of goodness dull, and scorned of pride;<br/>

  Until at length was done the awful deed,<br/>

  And thou didst lie outworn in stony bower<br/>

  Three days asleep—oh, slumber godlike-brief<br/>

  For man of sorrows and acquaint with grief!<br/>

  Life-seed thou diedst, that Death might lose his power,<br/>

  And thou, with rooted stem and shadowy leaf,<br/>

  Rise, of humanity the crimson flower.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  XIV.</h4>

<p>  Where dim the ethereal eye, no art, though clear<br/>

  As golden star in morning's amber springs,<br/>

  Can pierce the fogs of low imaginings:<br/>

  Painting and sculpture are a mockery mere.<br/>

  Where dull to deafness is the hearing ear,<br/>

  Vain is the poet. Nought but earthly things<br/>

  Have credence. When the soaring skylark sings<br/>

  How shall the stony statue strain to hear?<br/>

  Open the deaf ear, wake the sleeping eye,<br/>

  And Lo, musicians, painters, poets—all<br/>

  Trooping instinctive, come without a call!<br/>

  As winds that where they list blow evermore;<br/>

  As waves from silent deserts roll to die<br/>

  In mighty voices on the peopled shore.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  XV.</h4>

<p>  Our ears thou openedst; mad'st our eyes to see.<br/>

  All they who work in stone or colour fair,<br/>

  Or build up temples of the quarried air,<br/>

  Which we call music, scholars are of thee.<br/>

  Henceforth in might of such, the earth shall be<br/>

  Truth's temple-theatre, where she shall wear<br/>

  All forms of revelation, all men bear<br/>

  Tapers in acolyte humility.<br/>

  O master-maker, thy exultant art<br/>

  Goes forth in making makers! Pictures? No,<br/>

  But painters, who in love and truth shall show<br/>

  Glad secrets from thy God's rejoicing heart.<br/>

  Sudden, green grass and waving corn up start<br/>

  When through dead sands thy living waters go.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  XVI.</h4>

<p>  From the beginning good and fair are one,<br/>

  But men the beauty from the truth will part,<br/>

  And, though the truth is ever beauty's heart,<br/>

  After the beauty will, short-breathed, run,<br/>

  And the indwelling truth deny and shun.<br/>

  Therefore, in cottage, synagogue, and mart,<br/>

  Thy thoughts came forth in common speech, not art;<br/>

  With voice and eye, in Jewish Babylon,<br/>

  Thou taughtest—not with pen or carved stone,<br/>

  Nor in thy hand the trembling wires didst take:<br/>

  Thou of the truth not less than all wouldst make;<br/>

  For Truth's sake even her forms thou didst disown:<br/>

  Ere, through the love of beauty, truth shall fail,<br/>

  The light behind shall burn the broidered veil!<br/>
</p>

<h4>  XVII.</h4>

<p>  Holy of holies, my bare feet draw nigh:<br/>

  Jesus, thy body is the shining veil<br/>

  By which I look on God, nor grow death-pale.<br/>

  I know that in my verses poor may lie<br/>

  Things low, for see, the thinker is not high!<br/>

  But were my song as loud as saints' all-hail,<br/>

  As pure as prophet's cry of warning wail,<br/>

  As holy as thy mother's ecstasy—<br/>

  He sings a better, who, for love or ruth,<br/>

  Into his heart a little child doth take.<br/>

  Nor thoughts nor feelings, art nor wisdom seal<br/>

  The man who at thy table bread shall break.<br/>

  Thy praise was not that thou didst know, or feel,<br/>

  Or show, or love, but that thou didst the truth.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  XVIII.</h4>

<p>  Despised! Rejected by the priest-led roar<br/>

  Of the multitude! The imperial purple flung<br/>

  About the form the hissing scourge had stung,<br/>

  Witnessing naked to the truth it bore!<br/>

  True son of father true, I thee adore.<br/>

  Even the mocking purple truthful hung<br/>

  On thy true shoulders, bleeding its folds among,<br/>

  For thou wast king, art king for evermore!<br/>

  <i>I know the Father: he knows me the truth</i>.<br/>

  Truth-witness, therefore the one essential king,<br/>

  With thee I die, with thee live worshipping!<br/>

  O human God, O brother, eldest born,<br/>

  Never but thee was there a man in sooth,<br/>

  Never a true crown but thy crown of thorn!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="death-and-birth" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Death and Birth</h2>
<p>'Tis the midnight hour; I heard<br/>

The Abbey-bell give out the word.<br/>

Seldom is the lamp-ray shed<br/>

On some dwarfed foot-farer's head<br/>

In the deep and narrow street<br/>

Lying ditch-like at my feet<br/>

Where I stand at lattice high<br/>

Downward gazing listlessly<br/>

From my house upon the rock,<br/>

Peak of earth's foundation-block.<br/>
</p>

<p>  There her windows, every story,<br/>

Shine with far-off nebulous glory!<br/>

Round her in that luminous cloud<br/>

Stars obedient press and crowd,<br/>

She the centre of all gazing,<br/>

She the sun her planets dazing!<br/>

In her eyes' victorious lightning<br/>

Some are paling, some are brightening:<br/>

Those on which they gracious turn,<br/>

Stars combust, all tenfold burn;<br/>

Those from which they look away<br/>

Listless roam in twilight gray!<br/>

When on her my looks I bent<br/>

Wonder shook me like a tent,<br/>

And my eyes grew dim with sheen,<br/>

Wasting light upon its queen!<br/>

But though she my eyes might chain,<br/>

Rule my ebbing flowing brain,<br/>

Truth alone, without, within,<br/>

Can the soul's high homage win!<br/>
</p>

<p>  He, I do not doubt, is there<br/>

Who unveiled my idol fair!<br/>

And I thank him, grateful much,<br/>

Though his end was none of such.<br/>

He from shapely lips of wit<br/>

Let the fire-flakes lightly flit,<br/>

Scorching as the snow that fell<br/>

On the damned in Dante's hell;<br/>

With keen, gentle opposition,<br/>

Playful, merciless precision,<br/>

Mocked the sweet romance of youth<br/>

Balancing on spheric truth;<br/>

He on sense's firm set plane<br/>

Rolled the unstable ball amain:<br/>

With a smile she looked at me,<br/>

Stung my soul, and set me free.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Welcome, friend! Bring in your bricks.<br/>

Mortar there? No need to mix?<br/>

That is well. And picks and hammers?<br/>

Verily these are no shammers!—<br/>

There, my friend, build up that niche,<br/>

That one with the painting rich!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Yes, you're right; it is a show<br/>

Picture seldom can bestow;<br/>

City palaces and towers,<br/>

Terraced gardens, twilight bowers,<br/>

Vistas deep through swaying masts,<br/>

Pennons flaunting in the blasts:<br/>

Build; my room it does not fit;<br/>

Brick-glaze is the thing for it!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Yes, a window you may call it;<br/>

Not the less up you must wall it:<br/>

In that niche the dead world lies;<br/>

Bury death, and free mine eyes.<br/>
</p>

<p>  There were youths who held by me,<br/>

Said I taught, yet left them free:<br/>

Will they do as I said then?<br/>

God forbid! As ye are men,<br/>

Find the secret—follow and find!<br/>

All forget that lies behind;<br/>

Me, the schools, yourselves, forsake;<br/>

In your souls a silence make;<br/>

Hearken till a whisper come,<br/>

Listen, follow, and be dumb.<br/>
</p>

<p>  There! 'tis over; I am dead!<br/>

Of my life the broken thread<br/>

Here I cast out of my hand!—<br/>

O my soul, the merry land!<br/>

On my heart the sinking vault<br/>

Of my ruining past makes halt;<br/>

Ages I could sit and moan<br/>

For the shining world that's gone!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Haste and pierce the other wall;<br/>

Break an opening to the All!<br/>

Where? No matter; done is best.<br/>

Kind of window? Let that rest:<br/>

Who at morning ever lies<br/>

Pondering how to ope his eyes!<br/>
</p>

<p>  I bethink me: we must fall<br/>

On the thinnest of the wall!<br/>

There it must be, in that niche!—<br/>

No, the deepest—that in which<br/>

Stands the Crucifix.<br/>
</p>

<p>                     You start?—<br/>

Ah, your half-believing heart<br/>

Shrinks from that as sacrilege,<br/>

Or, at least, upon its edge!<br/>

Worse than sacrilege, I say,<br/>

Is it to withhold the day<br/>

From the brother whom thou knowest<br/>

For the God thou never sawest!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Reverently, O marble cold,<br/>

Thee in living arms I fold!<br/>

Thou who art thyself the way<br/>

From the darkness to the day,<br/>

Window, thou, to every land,<br/>

Wouldst not one dread moment stand<br/>

Shutting out the air and sky<br/>

And the dayspring from on high!<br/>

Brother with the rugged crown,<br/>

Gently thus I lift thee down!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Give me pick and hammer; you<br/>

Stand aside; the deed I'll do.<br/>

Yes, in truth, I have small skill,<br/>

But the best thing is the will.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Stroke on stroke! The frescoed plaster<br/>

Clashes downward, fast and faster.<br/>

Hark, I hear an outer stone<br/>

Down the rough rock rumbling thrown!<br/>

There's a cranny! there's a crack!<br/>

The great sun is at its back!<br/>

Lo, a mass is outward flung!<br/>

In the universe hath sprung!<br/>
</p>

<p>  See the gold upon the blue!<br/>

See the sun come blinding through!<br/>

See the far-off mountain shine<br/>

In the dazzling light divine!<br/>

Prisoned world, thy captive's gone!<br/>

Welcome wind, and sky, and sun!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="longing-2" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Longing</h2>
Away from the city's herds!
  Away from the noisy street!
Away from the storm of words,
  Where hateful and hating meet!

Away from the vapour grey,
  That like a boding of ill
Is blotting the morning gay,
  And gathers and darkens still!

Away from the stupid book!
  For, like the fog's weary rest,
With anger dull it fills each nook
  Of my aching and misty breast.

Over some shining shore,
  There hangeth a space of blue;
A parting 'mid thin clouds hoar
  Where the sunlight is falling through.

The glad waves are kissing the shore
  Rejoice, and tell it for ever;
The boat glides on, while its oar
  Is flashing out of the river.

Oh to be there with thee!
  Thou and I only, my love!
The sparkling, sands and the sea!
  And the sunshine of God above!
		</article>
		<article id="my-eyes-make-pictures" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">My Eyes Make Pictures</h2>
"My eyes make pictures, when they are shut."
    COLERIDGE.

Fair morn, I bring my greeting
  To lofty skies, and pale,
Save where cloud-shreds are fleeting
  Before the driving gale,
The weary branches tossing,
  Careless of autumn's grief,
Shadow and sunlight crossing
  On each earth-spotted leaf.

I will escape their grieving;
  And so I close my eyes,
And see the light boat heaving
  Where the billows fall and rise;
I see the sunlight glancing
  Upon its silvery sail,
Where a youth's wild heart is dancing,
  And a maiden growing pale.

And I am quietly pacing
  The smooth stones o'er and o'er,
Where the merry waves are chasing
  Each other to the shore.
Words come to me while listening
  Where the rocks and waters meet,
And the little shells are glistening
  In sand-pools at my feet.

Away! the white sail gleaming!
  Again I close my eyes,
And the autumn light is streaming
  From pale blue cloudless skies;
Upon the lone hill falling
  'Mid the sound of heather-bells,
Where the running stream is calling
  Unto the silent wells.

Along the pathway lonely,
  My horse and I move slow;
No living thing, save only
  The home-returning crow.
And the moon, so large, is peering
  Up through the white cloud foam;
And I am gladly nearing
  My father's house, my home.

As I were gently dreaming
  The solemn trees look out;
The hills, the waters seeming
  In still sleep round about;
And in my soul are ringing
  Tones of a spirit-lyre,
As my beloved were singing
  Amid a sister-choir.

If peace were in my spirit,
  How oft I'd close my eyes,
And all the earth inherit,
  And all the changeful skies!
Thus leave the sermon dreary,
  Thus leave the lonely hearth;
No more a spirit weary--
  A free one of the earth!
		</article>
		<article id="death-1" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Death</h2>
<p>    When in the bosom of the eldest night<br/>

  This body lies, cold as a sculptured rest;<br/>

  When through its shaded windows comes no light,<br/>

  And its pale hands are folded on its breast—<br/>
</p>

<p>      How shall I fare, who had to wander out,<br/>

  And of the unknown land the frontier cross,<br/>

  Peering vague-eyed, uncertain, all about,<br/>

  Unclothed, mayhap unwelcomed, bathed in loss?<br/>
</p>

<p>      Shall I depart slow-floating like a mist,<br/>

  Over the city murmuring beneath;<br/>

  Over the trees and fields, where'er I list,<br/>

  Seeking the mountain and the lonely heath?<br/>
</p>

<p>      Or will a darkness, o'er material shows<br/>

  Descending, hide them from the spirit's sight;<br/>

  As from the sun a blotting radiance flows<br/>

  Athwart the stars all glorious through the night;<br/>
</p>

<p>      And the still spirit hang entranced, alone,<br/>

  Like one in an exalted opium-dream—<br/>

  Soft-flowing time, insisting space, o'erblown,<br/>

  With form and colour, tone and touch and gleam,<br/>
</p>

<p>      Thought only waking—thought that may not own<br/>

  The lapse of ages, or the change of spot;<br/>

  Its doubt all cast on what it counted known,<br/>

  Its faith all fixed on what appeareth not?<br/>
</p>

<p>      Or, worn with weariness, shall we sleep until,<br/>

  Our life restored by long and dreamless rest,<br/>

  Of God's oblivion we have drunk our fill,<br/>

  And wake his little ones, peaceful and blest?<br/>
</p>

<p>      I nothing know, and nothing need to know.<br/>

  God is; I shall be ever in his sight!<br/>

  Give thou me strength to labour well, and so<br/>

  Do my day's work ere fall my coming night.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="lessons-for-a-child" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Lessons for a Child</h2>
<h5>I.</h5>

<p>There breathes not a breath of the summer air<br/>

But the spirit of love is moving there;<br/>

Not a trembling leaf on the shadowy tree,<br/>

Flutters with hundreds in harmony,<br/>

But that spirit can part its tone from the rest,<br/>

And read the life in its beetle's breast.<br/>

When the sunshiny butterflies come and go,<br/>

Like flowers paying visits to and fro,<br/>

Not a single wave of their fanning wings<br/>

Is unfelt by the spirit that feeleth all things.<br/>

The long-mantled moths that sleep at noon<br/>

And rove in the light of the gentler moon;<br/>

And the myriad gnats that dance like a wall,<br/>

Or a moving column that will not fall;<br/>

And the dragon-flies that go burning by,<br/>

Shot like a glance from a seeking eye—<br/>

There is one being that loves them all:<br/>

Not a fly in a spider's web can fall<br/>

But he cares for the spider, and cares for the fly;<br/>

He cares for you, whether you laugh or cry,<br/>

Cares whether your mother smile or sigh.<br/>

How he cares for so many, I do not know,<br/>

But it would be too strange if he did not so—<br/>

Dreadful and dreary for even a fly:<br/>

So I cannot wait for the <i>how</i> and <i>why</i>,<br/>

But believe that all things are gathered and nursed<br/>

In the love of him whose love went first<br/>

And made this world—like a huge great nest<br/>

For a hen to sit on with feathery breast.<br/>
</p>

<h5>II.</h5>

<p>  The bird on the leafy tree,<br/>

  The bird in the cloudy sky,<br/>

  The hart in the forest free,<br/>

  The stag on the mountain high,<br/>

  The fish inside the sea,<br/>

  The albatross asleep<br/>

  On the outside of the deep,<br/>

  The bee through the summer sunny<br/>

  Hunting for wells of honey—<br/>

  What is the thought in the breast<br/>

  Of the little bird in its nest?<br/>

  What is the thought in the songs<br/>

  The lark in the sky prolongs?<br/>

  What mean the dolphin's rays,<br/>

  Winding his watery ways?<br/>

  What is the thought of the stag,<br/>

  Stately on yonder crag?<br/>

  What does the albatross think,<br/>

  Dreaming upon the brink<br/>

  Of the mountain billow, and then<br/>

  Dreaming down in its glen?<br/>

  What is the thought of the bee<br/>

  Fleeting so silently,<br/>

  Or flitting—with busy hum,<br/>

  But a careless go-and-come—<br/>

  From flower-chalice to chalice,<br/>

  Like a prince from palace to palace?<br/>

  What makes them alive, so very—<br/>

  Some of them, surely, merry.<br/>

  And others so stately calm<br/>

  They might be singing a psalm?<br/>
</p>

<p>    I cannot tell what they think—-<br/>

  Only know they eat and drink,<br/>

  And on all that lies about<br/>

  With a quiet heart look out,<br/>

  Each after its kind, stately or coy,<br/>

  Solemn like man, gamesome like boy,<br/>

  Glad with its own mysterious joy.<br/>
</p>

<p>    And God, who knows their thoughts and ways<br/>

  Though his the creatures do not know,<br/>

  From his full heart fills each of theirs:<br/>

  Into them all his breath doth go;<br/>

  Good and better with them he shares;<br/>

  Content with their bliss while they have no prayers,<br/>

  He takes their joy for praise.<br/>
</p>

<p>    If thou wouldst be like him, little one, go<br/>

  And be kind with a kindness undefiled;<br/>

  Who gives for the pleasure of thanks, my child,<br/>

  God's gladness cannot know.<br/>
</p>

<h5>III.</h5>

<p>  Root met root in the spongy ground,<br/>

    Searching each for food:<br/>

  Each turned aside, and away it wound.<br/>

    And each got something good.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Sound met sound in the wavy air—<br/>

    That made a little to-do!<br/>

  They jostled not long, but were quick and fair;<br/>

    Each found its path and flew.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Drop dashed on drop, as the rain-shower fell;<br/>

    They joined and sank below:<br/>

  In gathered thousands they rose a well,<br/>

    With a singing overflow.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Wind met wind in a garden green,<br/>

    They began to push and fret:<br/>

  A tearing whirlwind arose between:<br/>

    There love lies bleeding yet.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="hope-deferred-1" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Hope Deferred</h2>
<p>  Summer is come again. The sun is bright,<br/>

  And the soft wind is breathing. Airy joy<br/>

  Is sparkling in thine eyes, and in their light<br/>

  My soul is shining. Come; our day's employ<br/>

  Shall be to revel in unlikely things,<br/>

  In gayest hopes, fondest imaginings,<br/>

  And make-believes of bliss. Come, we will talk<br/>

  Of waning moons, low winds, and a dim sea;<br/>

  Till this fair summer, deepening as we walk,<br/>

  Has grown a paradise for you and me.<br/>
</p>

<p>  But ah, those leaves!—it was not summer's mouth<br/>

  Breathed such a gold upon them. And look there—<br/>

  That beech how red! See, through its boughs, half-bare,<br/>

  How low the sun lies in the mid-day south!—<br/>

  The sweetness is but one pined memory flown<br/>

  Back from our summer, wandering alone!<br/>

  See, see the dead leaves falling! Hear thy heart,<br/>

  Which, with the year's pulse beating swift or slow,<br/>

  Takes in the changing world its changing part,<br/>

  Return a sigh, an echo sad and low,<br/>

  To the faint, scarcely audible sound<br/>

  With which the leaf goes whispering to the ground!<br/>

  O love, sad winter lieth at the door—<br/>

  Behind sad winter, age—we know no more.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Come round me, dear hearts. All of us will hold<br/>

  Each of us compassed: we are growing old;<br/>

  And if we be not as a ring enchanted,<br/>

  Hearts around heart, with love to keep it gay,<br/>

  The young, who claim the joy that haunted<br/>

  Our visions once, will push us far away<br/>

  Into the desolate regions, dim and gray,<br/>

  Where the sea moans, and hath no other cry,<br/>

  The clouds hang low, and have no tears,<br/>

  Old dreams lie mouldering in a pit of years,<br/>

  And hopes and songs all careless pass us by.<br/>

  But if all each do keep,<br/>

  The rising tide of youth will sweep<br/>

  Around us with its laughter-joyous waves,<br/>

  As ocean fair some palmy island laves,<br/>

  To loneliness heaved slow from out the deep;<br/>

  And our youth hover round us like the breath<br/>

  Of one that sleeps, and sleepeth not to death.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Thus ringed eternally, to parted graves,<br/>

  The sundered doors into one palace home,<br/>

  Stumbling through age's thickets, we will go,<br/>

  Faltering but faithful—willing to lie low,<br/>

  Willing to part, not willing to deny<br/>

  The lovely past, where all the futures lie.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Oh! if thou be, who of the live art lord,<br/>

  Not of the dead—Lo, by that self-same word,<br/>

  Thou art not lord of age, but lord of youth—<br/>

  Because there is no age, in sooth,<br/>

  Beyond its passing shows!<br/>

  A mist o'er life's dimmed lantern grows;<br/>

  Thou break'st the glass, out streams the light<br/>

  That knows not youth nor age,<br/>

  That fears no darkness nor the rage<br/>

  Of windy tempests—burning still more bright<br/>

  Than when glad youth was all about,<br/>

  And summer winds were out!<br/>
</p>

<p>1845.</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-death-of-the-old-year" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Death of the Old Year</h2>
The weary Old Year is dead at last;
His corpse 'mid the ruins of Time is cast,
Where the mouldering wrecks of lost Thought lie,
And the rich-hued blossoms of Passion die
To a withering grass that droops o'er his grave,
The shadowy Titan's refuge cave.
Strange lights from pale moony Memory lie
On the weedy columns beneath its eye;
And strange is the sound of the ghostlike breeze,
In the lingering leaves on the skeleton trees;
And strange is the sound of the falling shower,
When the clouds of dead pain o'er the spirit lower;
Unheard in the home he inhabiteth,
The land where all lost things are gathered by Death.

Alone I reclined in the closing year;
Voice, nor breathing, nor step was near;
And I said in the weariness of my breast:
Weary Old Year, thou art going to rest;
O weary Old Year, I would I might be
One hour alone in thy dying with thee!
Would thou wert a spirit, whose low lament
Might mix with the sighs from my spirit sent;
For I am weary of man and life;
Weary of restless unchanging strife;
Weary of change that is ever changing;
Weary of thought that is ever ranging,
Ever falling in efforts vain,
Fluttering, upspringing from earth again,
Struggling once more through the darkness to wing
That hangs o'er the birthplace of everything,
And choked yet again in the vapour's breast,
Sinking once more to a helpless rest.
I am weary of tears that scarce are dry,
Ere their founts are filled as the cloud goes by;
Weary of feelings where each in the throng
Mocks at the rest as they crowd along;
Where Pride over all, like a god on high,
Sits enshrined in his self-complacency;
Where Selfishness crawls, the snake-demon of ill,
The least suspected where busiest still;
Where all things evil and painful entwine,
And all in their hate and their sorrow are mine:
O weary Old Year, I would I might be
One hour by thy dying, to weep with thee!

Peace, the soul's slumber, was round me shed;
The sleep where thought lives, but its pain is dead;
And my musings led me, a spirit-band,
Through the wide realms of their native land;
Till I stood by the couch of the mighty dying,
A lonely shore in the midnight lying.
He lay as if he had laid him to sleep,
And the stars above him their watch did keep;
And the mournful wind with the dreamy sigh,
The homeless wanderer of the sky,
Was the only attendant whose gentle breath
Soothed him yet on the couch of death;
And the dying waves of the heedless sea
Fell at his feet most listlessly.

But he lay in peace, with his solemn eye
Looking far through the mists of futurity.
A smile gleamed over the death-dew that lay
On his withered cheek as life ebbed away.
A darkness lay on his forehead vast;
But the light of expectancy o'er it was cast,--
A light that shone from the coming day,
Travelling unseen to the East away.
In his cloudy robes that lay shadowing wide,
I stretched myself motionless by his side;
And his eyes with their calm, unimpassioned power,
Soothing my heart like an evening shower,
Led in a spectral, far-billowing train,
The hours of the Past through my spirit again.

There were fears of evil whose stony eyes
Froze joy in its gushing melodies.
Some floated afar on thy tranquil wave,
And the heart looked up from its search for a grave;
While others as guests to the bosom came,
And left its wild children more sorrow, less shame;
For the death-look parts from their chilling brow,
And they bless the heads that before them bow;
And floating away in the far-off gloom.
Thankfulness follows them to their tomb.
There were Hopes that found not a place to rest
Their foot 'mid the rush of all-ocean's breast;
And home to the sickening heart flew back,
But changed into sorrows upon their track;
And through the moan of the darkening sea
Bearing no leaf from the olive-tree.
There were joys that looked forth with their maiden eyes,
And smiled, and were gone, with a sad surprise;
And the Love of the Earthly, whose beauteous form
Beckoned me on through sunshine and storm;
But when the bounding heart sprang high,
Meeting her smile with a speechless sigh,
The arms sunk home with a painful start,
Clasping a vacancy to the heart.

And the voice of the dying I seem to hear
But whether his breathing is in mine ear,
Or the sounds of the breaking billows roll
The lingering accents upon my soul,
I know not; but thus they seem to bear
Reproof to my soul for its faint despair:--
Blame not life, it is scarce begun;
Blame not mankind, thyself art one.
And change is holy, oh! blame it never;
Thy soul shall live by its changing ever;
Not the bubbling change of a stagnant pool,
But the change of a river, flowing and full;
Where all that is noble and good will grow
Mightier still as the full tides flow;
Till it joins the hidden, the boundless sea,
Rolling through depths of Eternity.
Blame not thy thought that it cannot reach
That which the Infinite must teach;
Bless thy God that the Word came nigh
To guide thee home to thy native sky,
Where all things are homely and glorious too,
And the children are wondering, and glad, and true.

And he pointed away to an Eastern star,
That gleamed through his robes o'er the ocean afar;
And I knew that a star had looked o'er the rim
Of my world that lay all dreary and dim;
And was slowly dissolving the darkness deep
Which, like evil nurse, had soothed me to sleep;
And rising higher, and shining clearer,
Would draw the day-spring ever nearer,
Till the sunshine of God burst full on the morn,
And every hill and valley would start
With the joy of light and new gratitude born
To Him who had led me home to His heart;
And all things that lived in my world within
With the gladness of tears to His feet come in;
And the false Self be banished with fiends to dwell
In the gloomiest haunts of his native hell;
And Pride, that ruled like a god above,
Be trod 'neath the feet of triumphant Love.

And again he pointed across the sea,
And another vision arose in me:
And I knew I walked an ocean of fear,
Yet of safety too, for the Master was near;
And every wave of sorrow or dread,
O'er which strong faith should upraise my head,
Would show from the height of its troubled crest
Still nearer and nearer the Land of Rest.
And when the storm-spray on the wind should arise,
And with tears unbidden should blind mine eyes,
And hide from my vision the Home of Love,
I knew I must look to the star above,
And the mists of Passion would quickly flee,
And the storm would faint to serenity.

And again it seemed as if words found scope,
The sorrowing words of a farewell Hope:
"I will meet thee again in that deathless land,
Whenever thy foot shall imprint the strand;
And the loveliest things that have here been mine,
Shall there in eternal beauty shine;
For there I shall live and never die,
Part of a glorious Eternity;
For the death of Time is _To be forgot,_
And I go where oblivion entereth not."

He was dead. He had gone to the rest of his race,
With a sad smile frozen upon his face.
Deadness clouded his eyes. And his death-bell rung,
And my sorrowing thoughts his low requiem sung;
And with trembling steps his worn body cast
In the wide charnel-house of the dreary Past.
Thus met the noble Old Year his end:
Rest him in peace, for he was my friend.

As my thoughts returned from their wandering,
A voice in my spirit was lingering;
And its sounds were like Spring's first breeze's hum,
When the oak-leaves fall, and the young leaves come:

Time dieth ever, is ever born:
On the footsteps of night so treadeth the morn;
Shadow and brightness, death and birth,
Chasing each other o'er the round earth.
But the spirit of Time from his tomb is springing,
The dust of decay from his pinions flinging;
Ever renewing his glorious youth,
Scattering around him the dew of Truth.
Oh, let it raise in the desert heart
Fountains and flowers that shall never depart!
This spirit will fill us with thought sublime;
For the _End of God_ is the spirit of Time.
		</article>
		<article id="a-thanksgiving" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Thanksgiving</h2>
I Thank Thee, boundless Giver,
  That the thoughts Thou givest flow
In sounds that like a river
  All through the darkness go.
And though few should swell the pleasure,
  By sharing this my wine,
My heart will clasp its treasure,
  This secret gift of Thine.

My heart the joy inherits,
  And will oft be sung to rest;
And some wandering hoping spirits
  May listen and be blest.
For the sound may break the hours
  In a dark and gloomy mood,
As the wind breaks up the bowers
  Of the brooding sunless wood.

For every sound of gladness
  Is a prophet-wind that tells
Of a summer without sadness,
  And a love without farewells;
And a heart that hath no ailing,
  And an eye that is not dim,
And a faith that without failing
  Shall be complete in Him.

And when my heart is mourning,
  The songs it lately gave,
Back to their fount returning,
  Make sweet the bitter wave;
And forth a new stream floweth,
  In sunshine winding fair;
And through the dark wood goeth
  Glad laughter on the air.

For the heart of man that waketh,
  Yet hath not ceased to dream,
Is the only fount that maketh
  The sweet and bitter stream.
But the sweet will still be flowing
  When the bitter stream is dry,
And glad music only going
  On the breezes of the sky.

I thank Thee, boundless Giver,
  That the thoughts Thou givest flow
In sounds that like a river
  All through the darkness go.
And though few should swell the pleasure
  By sharing this my wine,
My heart will clasp its treasure,
  This secret gift of Thine.
		</article>
		<article id="the-gospel-women" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Gospel Women</h2>
<h2>I.</h2>

<h5>  <i>THE MOTHER MARY</i>.</h5>

<h5>I.</h5>

<p>  Mary, to thee the heart was given<br/>

  For infant hand to hold,<br/>

  And clasp thus, an eternal heaven,<br/>

  The great earth in its fold.<br/>
</p>

<p>  He seized the world with tender might<br/>

  By making thee his own;<br/>

  Thee, lowly queen, whose heavenly height<br/>

  Was to thyself unknown.<br/>
</p>

<p>  He came, all helpless, to thy power,<br/>

  For warmth, and love, and birth;<br/>

  In thy embraces, every hour,<br/>

  He grew into the earth.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Thine was the grief, O mother high,<br/>

  Which all thy sisters share<br/>

  Who keep the gate betwixt the sky<br/>

  And this our lower air;<br/>
</p>

<p>  But unshared sorrows, gathering slow,<br/>

  Will rise within thy heart,<br/>

  Strange thoughts which like a sword will go<br/>

  Thorough thy inward part.<br/>
</p>

<p>  For, if a woman bore a son<br/>

  That was of angel brood,<br/>

  Who lifted wings ere day was done,<br/>

  And soared from where she stood,<br/>
</p>

<p>  Wild grief would rave on love's high throne;<br/>

  She, sitting in the door,<br/>

  All day would cry: "He was my own,<br/>

  And now is mine no more!"<br/>
</p>

<p>  So thou, O Mary, years on years,<br/>

  From child-birth to the cross,<br/>

  Wast filled with yearnings, filled with fears,<br/>

  Keen sense of love and loss.<br/>
</p>

<p>  His childish thoughts outsoared thy reach;<br/>

  His godlike tenderness<br/>

  Would sometimes seem, in human speech,<br/>

  To thee than human less.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Strange pangs await thee, mother mild,<br/>

  A sorer travail-pain;<br/>

  Then will the spirit of thy child<br/>

  Be born in thee again.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Till then thou wilt forebode and dread;<br/>

  Loss will be still thy fear—<br/>

  Till he be gone, and, in his stead,<br/>

  His very self appear.<br/>
</p>

<p>  For, when thy son hath reached his goal,<br/>

  And vanished from the earth,<br/>

  Soon wilt thou find him in thy soul,<br/>

  A second, holier birth.<br/>
</p>

<h4>II.</h4>

<p>  Ah, there he stands! With wondering face<br/>

  Old men surround the boy;<br/>

  The solemn looks, the awful place<br/>

  Bestill the mother's joy.<br/>
</p>

<p>  In sweet reproach her gladness hid,<br/>

  Her trembling voice says—low,<br/>

  Less like the chiding than the chid—<br/>

  "How couldst thou leave us so?"<br/>
</p>

<p>  But will her dear heart understand<br/>

  The answer that he gives—<br/>

  Childlike, eternal, simple, grand,<br/>

  The law by which he lives?<br/>
</p>

<p>  "Why sought ye me?" Ah, mother dear,<br/>

  The gulf already opes<br/>

  That will in thee keep live the fear,<br/>

  And part thee from thy hopes!<br/>
</p>

<p>  "My father's business—that ye know<br/>

  I cannot choose but do."<br/>

  Mother, if he that work forego,<br/>

  Not long he cares for you.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Creation's harder, better part<br/>

  Now occupies his hand:<br/>

  I marvel not the mother's heart<br/>

  Not yet could understand.<br/>
</p>

<h4>III.</h4>

<p>  The Lord of life among them rests;<br/>

  They quaff the merry wine;<br/>

  They do not know, those wedding guests,<br/>

  The present power divine.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Believe, on such a group he smiled,<br/>

  Though he might sigh the while;<br/>

  Believe not, sweet-souled Mary's child<br/>

  Was born without a smile.<br/>
</p>

<p>  He saw the pitchers, high upturned,<br/>

  Their last red drops outpour;<br/>

  His mother's cheek with triumph burned,<br/>

  And expectation wore.<br/>
</p>

<p>  He knew the prayer her bosom housed,<br/>

  He read it in her eyes;<br/>

  Her hopes in him sad thoughts have roused<br/>

  Ere yet her words arise.<br/>
</p>

<p>  "They have no wine!" she, halting, said,<br/>

  Her prayer but half begun;<br/>

  Her eyes went on, "Lift up thy head,<br/>

  Show what thou art, my son!"<br/>
</p>

<p>  A vision rose before his eyes,<br/>

  The cross, the waiting tomb,<br/>

  The people's rage, the darkened skies,<br/>

  His unavoided doom:<br/>
</p>

<p>  Ah woman dear, thou must not fret<br/>

  Thy heart's desire to see!<br/>

  His hour of honour is not yet—<br/>

  'Twill come too soon for thee!<br/>
</p>

<p>  His word was dark; his tone was kind;<br/>

  His heart the mother knew;<br/>

  His eyes in hers looked deep, and shined;<br/>

  They gave her heart the cue.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Another, on the word intent,<br/>

  Had read refusal there;<br/>

  She heard in it a full consent,<br/>

  A sweetly answered prayer.<br/>
</p>

<p>  "Whate'er he saith unto you, do."<br/>

  Out flowed his grapes divine;<br/>

  Though then, as now, not many knew<br/>

  Who makes the water wine.<br/>
</p>

<h4>IV.</h4>

<p>  "He is beside himself!" Dismayed,<br/>

  His mother, brothers talked:<br/>

  He from the well-known path had strayed<br/>

  In which their fathers walked!<br/>
</p>

<p>  With troubled hearts they sought him. Loud<br/>

  Some one the message bore:—<br/>

  He stands within, amid a crowd,<br/>

  They at the open door:—<br/>
</p>

<p>  "Thy mother and thy brothers would<br/>

  Speak with thee. Lo, they stand<br/>

  Without and wait thee!" Like a flood<br/>

  Of sunrise on the land,<br/>
</p>

<p>  A new-born light his face o'erspread;<br/>

  Out from his eyes it poured;<br/>

  He lifted up that gracious head,<br/>

  Looked round him, took the word:<br/>
</p>

<p>  "My mother—brothers—who are they?"<br/>

  Hearest thou, Mary mild?<br/>

  This is a sword that well may slay—<br/>

  Disowned by thy child!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Ah, no! My brothers, sisters, hear—<br/>

  They are our humble lord's!<br/>

  O mother, did they wound <i>thy</i> ear?—<br/>

  <i>We</i> thank him for the words.<br/>
</p>

<p>  "Who are my friends?" Oh, hear him say,<br/>

  Stretching his hand abroad,<br/>

  "My mother, sisters, brothers, are they<br/>

  That do the will of God!"<br/>
</p>

<p>  <i>My brother</i>! Lord of life and me,<br/>

  If life might grow to this!—<br/>

  Would it not, brother, sister, be<br/>

  Enough for all amiss?<br/>
</p>

<p>  Yea, mother, hear him and rejoice:<br/>

  Thou art his mother still,<br/>

  But may'st be more—of thy own choice<br/>

  Doing his Father's will.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Ambition for thy son restrain,<br/>

  Thy will to God's will bow:<br/>

  Thy son he shall be yet again.<br/>

  And twice his mother thou.<br/>
</p>

<p>  O humble man, O faithful son!<br/>

  That woman most forlorn<br/>

  Who yet thy father's will hath done,<br/>

  Thee, son of man, hath born!<br/>
</p>

<h4>V.</h4>

<p>  Life's best things gather round its close<br/>

  To light it from the door;<br/>

  When woman's aid no further goes,<br/>

  She weeps and loves the more.<br/>
</p>

<p>  She doubted oft, feared for his life,<br/>

  Yea, feared his mission's loss;<br/>

  But now she shares the losing strife,<br/>

  And weeps beside the cross.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The dreaded hour is come at last,<br/>

  The sword hath reached her soul;<br/>

  The hour of tortured hope is past,<br/>

  And gained the awful goal.<br/>
</p>

<p>  There hangs the son her body bore,<br/>

  The limbs her arms had prest!<br/>

  The hands, the feet the driven nails tore<br/>

  Had lain upon her breast!<br/>
</p>

<p>  He speaks; the words how faintly brief,<br/>

  And how divinely dear!<br/>

  The mother's heart yearns through its grief<br/>

  Her dying son to hear.<br/>
</p>

<p>  "Woman, behold thy son.—Behold<br/>

  Thy mother." Blessed hest<br/>

  That friend to her torn heart to fold<br/>

  Who understood him best!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Another son—ah, not instead!—<br/>

  He gave, lest grief should kill,<br/>

  While he was down among the dead,<br/>

  Doing his father's will.<br/>
</p>

<p>  No, not <i>instead</i>! the coming joy<br/>

  Will make him hers anew;<br/>

  More hers than when, a little boy,<br/>

  His life from hers he drew.<br/>
</p>

<h4>II.</h4>

<h5>  <i>THE WOMAN THAT LIFTED UP HER VOICE</i>.</h5>

<p>  Filled with his words of truth and right,<br/>

  Her heart will break or cry:<br/>

  A woman's cry bursts forth in might<br/>

  Of loving agony.<br/>
</p>

<p>  "Blessed the womb, thee, Lord, that bare!<br/>

  The bosom that thee fed!"<br/>

  A moment's silence filled the air,<br/>

  All heard the words she said.<br/>
</p>

<p>  He turns his face: he knows the cry,<br/>

  The fountain whence it springs—<br/>

  A woman's heart that glad would die<br/>

  For woman's best of things.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Good thoughts, though laggard in the rear,<br/>

  He never quenched or chode:<br/>

  "Yea, rather, blessed they that hear<br/>

  And keep the word of God!"<br/>
</p>

<p>  He would uplift her, not rebuke.<br/>

  The crowd began to stir.<br/>

  We miss how she the answer took;<br/>

  We hear no more of her.<br/>
</p>

<h4>III.</h4>

<h5>  <i>THE MOTHER OF ZEBEDEE'S CHILDREN</i>.</h5>

<p>  She knelt, she bore a bold request,<br/>

  Though shy to speak it out:<br/>

  Ambition, even in mother's breast,<br/>

  Before him stood in doubt.<br/>
</p>

<p>  "What is it?" "Grant thy promise now,<br/>

  My sons on thy right hand<br/>

  And on thy left shall sit when thou<br/>

  Art king, Lord, in the land."<br/>
</p>

<p>  "Ye know not what ye ask." There lay<br/>

  A baptism and a cup<br/>

  She understood not, in the way<br/>

  By which he must go up.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Her mother-love would lift them high<br/>

    Above their fellow-men;<br/>

  Her woman-pride would, standing nigh,<br/>

    Share in their grandeur then!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Would she have joyed o'er prosperous quest,<br/>

    Counted her prayer well heard,<br/>

  Had they, of three on Calvary's crest,<br/>

    Hung dying, first and third?<br/>
</p>

<p>  She knoweth neither way nor end:<br/>

    In dark despair, full soon,<br/>

  She will not mock the gracious friend<br/>

    With prayer for any boon.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Higher than love could dream or dare<br/>

    To ask, he them will set;<br/>

  They shall his cup and baptism share,<br/>

    And share his kingdom yet!<br/>
</p>

<p>  They, entering at his palace-door,<br/>

    Will shun the lofty seat;<br/>

  Will gird themselves, and water pour,<br/>

    And wash each other's feet;<br/>
</p>

<p>  Then down beside their lowly Lord<br/>

    On the Father's throne shall sit:<br/>

  For them who godlike help afford<br/>

    God hath prepared it.<br/>
</p>

<h4>IV.</h4>

<h5>  <i>THE SYROPHENICIAN WOMAN</i>.</h5>

<p>  "Grant, Lord, her prayer, and let her go;<br/>

      She crieth after us."<br/>

  Nay, to the dogs ye cast it so;<br/>

      Serve not a woman thus.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Their pride, by condescension fed,<br/>

      He shapes with teaching tongue:<br/>

  "It is not meet the children's bread<br/>

      To little dogs be flung."<br/>
</p>

<p>  The words, for tender heart so sore,<br/>

      His voice did seem to rue;<br/>

  The gentle wrath his countenance wore,<br/>

      With her had not to do.<br/>
</p>

<p>  He makes her share the hurt of good,<br/>

      Takes what she would have lent,<br/>

  That those proud men their evil mood<br/>

      May see, and so repent;<br/>
</p>

<p>  And that the hidden faith in her<br/>

      May burst in soaring flame:<br/>

  With childhood deeper, holier,<br/>

      Is birthright not the same?<br/>
</p>

<p>  Ill names, of proud religion born—<br/>

      She'll wear the worst that comes;<br/>

  Will clothe her, patient, in their scorn,<br/>

      To share the healing crumbs!<br/>
</p>

<p>  "Truth, Lord; and yet the puppies small<br/>

      Under the table eat<br/>

  The crumbs the little ones let fall—<br/>

      That is not thought unmeet."<br/>
</p>

<p>  The prayer rebuff could not amate<br/>

      Was not like water spilt:<br/>

  "O woman, but thy faith is great!<br/>

      Be it even as thou wilt."<br/>
</p>

<p>  Thrice happy she who yet will dare,<br/>

      Who, baffled, prayeth still!<br/>

  He, if he may, will grant her prayer<br/>

      In fulness of <i>her</i> will!<br/>
</p>

<h3>V.</h3>

<h5>  <i>THE WIDOW OF NAIN</i>.</h5>

<p>  Forth from the city, with the load<br/>

      That makes the trampling low,<br/>

  They walk along the dreary road<br/>

      That dust and ashes go.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The other way, toward the gate<br/>

      Their trampling strong and loud,<br/>

  With hope of liberty elate,<br/>

      Comes on another crowd.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Nearer and nearer draw the twain—<br/>

      One with a wailing cry!<br/>

  How could the Life let such a train<br/>

      Of death and tears go by!<br/>
</p>

<p>  "Weep not," he said, and touched the bier:<br/>

      They stand, the dead who bear;<br/>

  The mother knows nor hope nor fear—<br/>

      He waits not for her prayer.<br/>
</p>

<p>  "Young man, I say to thee, arise."<br/>

      Who hears, he must obey:<br/>

  Up starts the body; wide the eyes<br/>

      Flash wonder and dismay.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The lips would speak, as if they caught<br/>

      Some converse sudden broke<br/>

  When the great word the dead man sought,<br/>

      And Hades' silence woke.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The lips would speak: the eyes' wild stare<br/>

      Gives place to ordered sight;<br/>

  The murmur dies upon the air;<br/>

      The soul is dumb with light.<br/>
</p>

<p>  He brings no news; he has forgot,<br/>

      Or saw with vision weak:<br/>

  Thou sees! all our unseen lot,<br/>

      And yet thou dost not speak.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Hold'st thou the news, as parent might<br/>

      A too good gift, away,<br/>

  Lest we should neither sleep at night,<br/>

      Nor do our work by day?<br/>
</p>

<p>  The mother leaves us not a spark<br/>

      Of her triumph over grief;<br/>

  Her tears alone have left their mark<br/>

      Upon the holy leaf:<br/>
</p>

<p>  Oft gratitude will thanks benumb,<br/>

      Joy will our laughter quell:<br/>

  May not Eternity be dumb<br/>

      With things too good to tell?<br/>
</p>

<p>  Her straining arms her lost one hold;<br/>

      Question she asketh none;<br/>

  She trusts for all he leaves untold;<br/>

      Enough, to clasp her son!<br/>
</p>

<p>  The ebb is checked, the flow begun,<br/>

      Sent rushing to the gate:<br/>

  Death turns him backward to the sun,<br/>

      And life is yet our fate!<br/>
</p>

<h3>VI.</h3>

<h5>  <i>THE WOMAN WHOM SATAN HAD BOUND</i>.</h5>

<p>  For years eighteen she, patient soul,<br/>

      Her eyes had graveward sent;<br/>

  Her earthly life was lapt in dole,<br/>

      She was so bowed and bent.<br/>
</p>

<p>  What words! To her? Who can be near?<br/>

      What tenderness of hands!<br/>

  Oh! is it strength, or fancy mere?<br/>

      New hope, or breaking bands?<br/>
</p>

<p>  The pent life rushes swift along<br/>

      Channels it used to know;<br/>

  Up, up, amid the wondering throng,<br/>

      She rises firm and slow—<br/>
</p>

<p>  To bend again in grateful awe—<br/>

      For will is power at length—<br/>

  In homage to the living Law<br/>

      Who gives her back her strength.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Uplifter of the down-bent head!<br/>

      Unbinder of the bound!<br/>

  Who seest all the burdened<br/>

      Who only see the ground!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Although they see thee not, nor cry,<br/>

      Thou watchest for the hour<br/>

  To lift the forward-beaming eye,<br/>

      To wake the slumbering power!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Thy hand will wipe the stains of time<br/>

      From off the withered face;<br/>

  Upraise thy bowed old men, in prime<br/>

      Of youthful manhood's grace!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Like summer days from winter's tomb,<br/>

      Shall rise thy women fair;<br/>

  Gray Death, a shadow, not a doom,<br/>

      Lo, is not anywhere!<br/>
</p>

<p>  All ills of life shall melt away<br/>

      As melts a cureless woe,<br/>

  When, by the dawning of the day<br/>

      Surprised, the dream must go.<br/>
</p>

<p>  I think thou, Lord, wilt heal me too,<br/>

      Whate'er the needful cure;<br/>

  The great best only thou wilt do,<br/>

      And hoping I endure.<br/>
</p>

<h3>VII.</h3>

<h5>  <i>THE WOMAN WHO CAME BEHIND HIM IN THE CROWD</i>.</h5>

<p>  Near him she stole, rank after rank;<br/>

      She feared approach too loud;<br/>

  She touched his garment's hem, and shrank<br/>

      Back in the sheltering crowd.<br/>
</p>

<p>  A shame-faced gladness thrills her frame:<br/>

      Her twelve years' fainting prayer<br/>

  Is heard at last! she is the same<br/>

      As other women there!<br/>
</p>

<p>  She hears his voice. He looks about.<br/>

      Ah! is it kind or good<br/>

  To drag her secret sorrow out<br/>

      Before that multitude?<br/>
</p>

<p>  The eyes of men she dares not meet—<br/>

      On her they straight must fall!—<br/>

  Forward she sped, and at his feet<br/>

      Fell down, and told him all.<br/>
</p>

<p>  To the one refuge she hath flown,<br/>

      The Godhead's burning flame!<br/>

  Of all earth's women she alone<br/>

      Hears there the tenderest name:<br/>
</p>

<p>  "Daughter," he said, "be of good cheer;<br/>

      Thy faith hath made thee whole:"<br/>

  With plenteous love, not healing mere,<br/>

      He comforteth her soul.<br/>
</p>

<h3>VIII.</h3>

<h5>  <i>THE WIDOW WITH THE TWO MITES</i>.</h5>

<p>  Here <i>much</i> and <i>little</i> shift and change,<br/>

      With scale of need and time;<br/>

  There <i>more</i> and <i>less</i> have meanings strange,<br/>

      Which the world cannot rime.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Sickness may be more hale than health,<br/>

      And service kingdom high;<br/>

  Yea, poverty be bounty's wealth,<br/>

      To give like God thereby.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Bring forth your riches; let them go,<br/>

      Nor mourn the lost control;<br/>

  For if ye hoard them, surely so<br/>

      Their rust will reach your soul.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Cast in your coins, for God delights<br/>

      When from wide hands they fall;<br/>

  But here is one who brings two mites,<br/>

      And thus gives more than all.<br/>
</p>

<p>  I think she did not hear the praise—<br/>

      Went home content with need;<br/>

  Walked in her old poor generous ways,<br/>

      Nor knew her heavenly meed.<br/>
</p>

<h3>IX.</h3>

<h5>  <i>THE WOMEN WHO MINISTERED UNTO HIM</i>.</h5>

<p>  Enough he labours for his hire;<br/>

      Yea, nought can pay his pain;<br/>

  But powers that wear and waste and tire,<br/>

      Need help to toil again.<br/>
</p>

<p>  They give him freely all they can,<br/>

      They give him clothes and food;<br/>

  In this rejoicing, that the man<br/>

      Is not ashamed they should.<br/>
</p>

<p>  High love takes form in lowly thing;<br/>

      He knows the offering such;<br/>

  To them 'tis little that they bring,<br/>

      To him 'tis very much.<br/>
</p>

<h3>X.</h3>

<h5>  <i>PILATE'S WIFE</i>.</h5>

<p>  Why came in dreams the low-born man<br/>

      Between thee and thy rest?<br/>

  In vain thy whispered message ran,<br/>

      Though justice was its quest!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Did some young ignorant angel dare—<br/>

      Not knowing what must be,<br/>

  Or blind with agony of care—<br/>

      To fly for help to thee?<br/>
</p>

<p>  I know not. Rather I believe,<br/>

      Thou, nobler than thy spouse,<br/>

  His rumoured grandeur didst receive,<br/>

      And sit with pondering brows,<br/>
</p>

<p>  Until thy maidens' gathered tale<br/>

      With possible marvel teems:<br/>

  Thou sleepest, and the prisoner pale<br/>

      Returneth in thy dreams.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Well mightst thou suffer things not few<br/>

      For his sake all the night!<br/>

  In pale eclipse he suffers, who<br/>

      Is of the world the light.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Precious it were to know thy dream<br/>

      Of such a one as he!<br/>

  Perhaps of him we, waking, deem<br/>

      As poor a verity.<br/>
</p>

<h3>XI.</h3>

<h5>  <i>THE WOMAN OF SAMARIA</i>.</h5>

<p>  In the hot sun, for water cool<br/>

      She walked in listless mood:<br/>

  When back she ran, her pitcher full<br/>

      Forgot behind her stood.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Like one who followed straying sheep,<br/>

      A weary man she saw,<br/>

  Who sat upon the well so deep,<br/>

      And nothing had to draw.<br/>
</p>

<p>  "Give me to drink," he said. Her hand<br/>

      Was ready with reply;<br/>

  From out the old well of the land<br/>

      She drew him plenteously.<br/>
</p>

<p>  He spake as never man before;<br/>

      She stands with open ears;<br/>

  He spake of holy days in store,<br/>

      Laid bare the vanished years.<br/>
</p>

<p>  She cannot still her throbbing heart,<br/>

      She hurries to the town,<br/>

  And cries aloud in street and mart,<br/>

      "The Lord is here: come down."<br/>
</p>

<p>  Her life before was strange and sad,<br/>

      A very dreary sound:<br/>

  Ah, let it go—or good or bad:<br/>

      She has the Master found!<br/>
</p>

<h3>XII.</h3>

<h5>  <i>MARY MAGDALENE</i>.</h5>

<p>  With wandering eyes and aimless zeal,<br/>

      She hither, thither, goes;<br/>

  Her speech, her motions, all reveal<br/>

      A mind without repose.<br/>
</p>

<p>  She climbs the hills, she haunts the sea,<br/>

      By madness tortured, driven;<br/>

  One hour's forgetfulness would be<br/>

      A gift from very heaven!<br/>
</p>

<p>  She slumbers into new distress;<br/>

      The night is worse than day:<br/>

  Exulting in her helplessness,<br/>

      Hell's dogs yet louder bay.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The demons blast her to and fro;<br/>

      She has no quiet place,<br/>

  Enough a woman still, to know<br/>

      A haunting dim disgrace.<br/>
</p>

<p>  A human touch! a pang of death!<br/>

      And in a low delight<br/>

  Thou liest, waiting for new breath.<br/>

      For morning out of night.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Thou risest up: the earth is fair,<br/>

      The wind is cool; thou art free!<br/>

  Is it a dream of hell's despair<br/>

      Dissolves in ecstasy?<br/>
</p>

<p>  That man did touch thee! Eyes divine<br/>

      Make sunrise in thy soul;<br/>

  Thou seëst love in order shine:—<br/>

      His health hath made thee whole!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Thou, sharing in the awful doom,<br/>

      Didst help thy Lord to die;<br/>

  Then, weeping o'er his empty tomb,<br/>

      Didst hear him <i>Mary</i> cry.<br/>
</p>

<p>  He stands in haste; he cannot stop;<br/>

      Home to his God he fares:<br/>

  "Go tell my brothers I go up<br/>

      To my Father, mine and theirs."<br/>
</p>

<p>  Run, Mary! lift thy heavenly voice;<br/>

      Cry, cry, and heed not how;<br/>

  Make all the new-risen world rejoice—<br/>

      Its first apostle thou!<br/>
</p>

<p>  What if old tales of thee have lied,<br/>

      Or truth have told, thou art<br/>

  All-safe with him, whate'er betide—<br/>

      Dwell'st with him in God's heart!<br/>
</p>

<h3>XIII.</h3>

<h5>  <i>THE WOMAN IN THE TEMPLE</i>.</h5>

<p>  A still dark joy! A sudden face!<br/>

      Cold daylight, footsteps, cries!<br/>

  The temple's naked, shining space,<br/>

      Aglare with judging eyes!<br/>
</p>

<p>  All in abandoned guilty hair,<br/>

      With terror-pallid lips,<br/>

  To vulgar scorn her honour bare,<br/>

      To lewd remarks and quips,<br/>
</p>

<p>  Her eyes she fixes on the ground<br/>

      Her shrinking soul to hide,<br/>

  Lest, at uncurtained windows found,<br/>

      Its shame be clear descried.<br/>
</p>

<p>  All idle hang her listless hands,<br/>

      They tingle with her shame;<br/>

  She sees not who beside her stands,<br/>

      She is so bowed with blame.<br/>
</p>

<p>  He stoops, he writes upon the ground,<br/>

      Regards nor priests nor wife;<br/>

  An awful silence spreads around,<br/>

      And wakes an inward strife.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Then comes a voice that speaks for thee,<br/>

      Pale woman, sore aghast:<br/>

  "Let him who from this sin is free<br/>

      At her the first stone cast!"<br/>
</p>

<p>  Ah then her heart grew slowly sad!<br/>

      Her eyes bewildered rose;<br/>

  She saw the one true friend she had,<br/>

      Who loves her though he knows.<br/>
</p>

<p>  He stoops. In every charnel breast<br/>

      Dead conscience rises slow:<br/>

  They, dumb before that awful guest,<br/>

      Turn, one by one, and go.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Up in her deathlike, ashy face<br/>

      Rises the living red;<br/>

  No greater wonder sure had place<br/>

      When Lazarus left the dead!<br/>
</p>

<p>  She is alone with him whose fear<br/>

      Made silence all around;<br/>

  False pride, false shame, they come not near,<br/>

      She has her saviour found!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Jesus hath spoken on her side,<br/>

      Those cruel men withstood!<br/>

  From him her shame she will not hide!<br/>

      For him she <i>will</i> be good!<br/>
</p>

<p>  He rose; he saw the temple bare;<br/>

      They two are left alone!<br/>

  He said unto her, "Woman, where<br/>

      Are thine accusers gone?"<br/>
</p>

<p>  "Hath none condemned thee?" "Master, no,"<br/>

      She answers, trembling sore.<br/>

  "Neither do I condemn thee. Go,<br/>

      And sin not any more."<br/>
</p>

<p>  She turned and went.—To hope and grieve?<br/>

      Be what she had not been?<br/>

  We are not told; but I believe<br/>

      His kindness made her clean.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Our sins to thee us captive hale—<br/>

      Ambitions, hatreds dire;<br/>

  Cares, fears, and selfish loves that fail,<br/>

      And sink us in the mire:<br/>
</p>

<p>  Our captive-cries with pardon meet;<br/>

      Our passion cleanse with pain;<br/>

  Lord, thou didst make these miry feet—<br/>

      Oh, wash them clean again!<br/>
</p>

<h4>XIV.</h4>

<h5>  <i>MARTHA</i>.</h5>

<p>  With joyful pride her heart is high:<br/>

      Her humble house doth hold<br/>

  The man her nation's prophecy<br/>

      Long ages hath foretold!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Poor, is he? Yes, and lowly born:<br/>

      Her woman-soul is proud<br/>

  To know and hail the coming morn<br/>

      Before the eyeless crowd.<br/>
</p>

<p>  At her poor table will he eat?<br/>

      He shall be served there<br/>

  With honour and devotion meet<br/>

      For any king that were!<br/>
</p>

<p>  'Tis all she can; she does her part,<br/>

      Profuse in sacrifice;<br/>

  Nor dreams that in her unknown heart<br/>

      A better offering lies.<br/>
</p>

<p>  But many crosses she must bear;<br/>

      Her plans are turned and bent;<br/>

  Do what she can, things will not wear<br/>

      The form of her intent.<br/>
</p>

<p>  With idle hands and drooping lid,<br/>

      See Mary sit at rest!<br/>

  Shameful it was her sister did<br/>

      No service for their guest!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Dear Martha, one day Mary's lot<br/>

      Must rule thy hands and eyes;<br/>

  Thou, all thy household cares forgot,<br/>

      Must sit as idly wise!<br/>
</p>

<p>  But once more first she set her word<br/>

      To bar her master's ways,<br/>

  Crying, "By this he stinketh, Lord,<br/>

      He hath been dead four days!"<br/>
</p>

<p>  Her housewife-soul her brother dear<br/>

      Would fetter where he lies!<br/>

  Ah, did her buried best then hear,<br/>

      And with the dead man rise?<br/>
</p>

<h3>XV.</h3>

<h5>  <i>MARY</i>.</h5>

<h5>  I.</h5>

<p>  She sitteth at the Master's feet<br/>

      In motionless employ;<br/>

  Her ears, her heart, her soul complete<br/>

      Drinks in the tide of joy.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Ah! who but she the glory knows<br/>

      Of life, pure, high, intense,<br/>

  In whose eternal silence blows<br/>

      The wind beyond the sense!<br/>
</p>

<p>  In her still ear, God's perfect grace<br/>

      Incarnate is in voice;<br/>

  Her thoughts, the people of the place,<br/>

      Receive it, and rejoice.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Her eyes, with heavenly reason bright,<br/>

      Are on the ground cast low;<br/>

  His words of spirit, life, and light—<br/>

      <i>They</i> set them shining so.<br/>
</p>

<p>  But see! a face is at the door<br/>

      Whose eyes are not at rest;<br/>

  A voice breaks on divinest lore<br/>

      With petulant request.<br/>
</p>

<p>  "Master," it said, "dost thou not care<br/>

      She lets me serve alone?<br/>

  Tell her to come and take her share."<br/>

      But Mary's eyes shine on.<br/>
</p>

<p>  She lifts them with a questioning glance,<br/>

      Calmly to him who heard;<br/>

  The merest sign, she'll rise at once,<br/>

      Nor wait the uttered word.<br/>
</p>

<p>  His "Martha, Martha!" with it bore<br/>

      A sense of coming <i>nay</i>;<br/>

  He told her that her trouble sore<br/>

      Was needless any day.<br/>
</p>

<p>  And he would not have Mary chid<br/>

      For want of needless care;<br/>

  The needful thing was what she did,<br/>

      At his feet sitting there.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Sure, joy awoke in her dear heart<br/>

      Doing the thing it would,<br/>

  When he, the holy, took her part,<br/>

      And called her choice the good!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Oh needful thing, Oh Mary's choice,<br/>

      Go not from us away!<br/>

  Oh Jesus, with the living voice,<br/>

      Talk to us every day!<br/>
</p>

<h4>  II.</h4>

<p>  Not now the living words are poured<br/>

      Into one listening ear;<br/>

  For many guests are at the board,<br/>

      And many speak and hear.<br/>
</p>

<p>  With sacred foot, refrained and slow,<br/>

      With daring, trembling tread,<br/>

  She comes, in worship bending low<br/>

      Behind the godlike head.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The costly chrism, in snowy stone,<br/>

      A gracious odour sends;<br/>

  Her little hoard, by sparing grown,<br/>

      In one full act she spends.<br/>
</p>

<p>  She breaks the box, the honoured thing!<br/>

      See how its riches pour!<br/>

  Her priestly hands anoint him king<br/>

      Whom peasant Mary bore.<br/>
</p>

<p>       *       *       *       *       *</p>

<p>  Not so does John the tale repeat:<br/>

      He saw, for he was there,<br/>

  Mary anoint the Master's feet,<br/>

      And wipe them with her hair.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Perhaps she did his head anoint,<br/>

      And then his feet as well;<br/>

  And John this one forgotten point<br/>

      Loved best of all to tell.<br/>
</p>

<p>  'Twas Judas called the splendour waste,<br/>

      'Twas Jesus said—Not so;<br/>

  Said that her love his burial graced:<br/>

      "Ye have the poor; I go."<br/>
</p>

<p>  Her hands unwares outsped his fate,<br/>

      The truth-king's felon-doom;<br/>

  The other women were too late,<br/>

      For he had left the tomb.<br/>
</p>

<h3>XVI.</h3>

<h5>  <i>THE WOMAN THAT WAS A SINNER</i>.</h5>

<p>  His face, his words, her heart awoke;<br/>

      Awoke her slumbering truth;<br/>

  She judged him well; her bonds she broke,<br/>

      And fled to him for ruth.<br/>
</p>

<p>  With tears she washed his weary feet;<br/>

      She wiped them with her hair;<br/>

  Her kisses—call them not unmeet,<br/>

      When they were welcome <i>there</i>.<br/>
</p>

<p>  What saint a richer crown could throw<br/>

      At his love-royal feet!<br/>

  Her tears, her lips, her hair, down go,<br/>

      His reign begun to greet.<br/>
</p>

<p>  His holy manhood's perfect worth<br/>

      Owns her a woman still;<br/>

  It is impossible henceforth<br/>

      For her to stoop to ill.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Her to herself his words restore,<br/>

      The radiance to the day;<br/>

  A horror to herself no more,<br/>

      Not yet a cast-away!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Her hands and kisses, ointment, tears,<br/>

      Her gathered wiping hair,<br/>

  Her love, her shame, her hopes, her fears,<br/>

      Mingle in worship rare.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Thou, Mary, too, thy hair didst spread<br/>

      To wipe the anointed feet;<br/>

  Nor didst thou only bless his head<br/>

      With precious spikenard sweet.<br/>
</p>

<p>  But none say thou thy tears didst pour<br/>

      To wash his parched feet first;<br/>

  Of tears thou couldst not have such store<br/>

      As from this woman burst!<br/>
</p>

<p>  If not in love she first be read,<br/>

      Her queen of sorrow greet;<br/>

  Mary, do thou anoint his head,<br/>

      And let her crown his feet.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Simon, her kisses will not soil;<br/>

      Her tears are pure as rain;<br/>

  The hair for him she did uncoil<br/>

      Had been baptized in pain.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Lo, God hath pardoned her so much,<br/>

      Love all her being stirs!<br/>

  His love to his poor child is such<br/>

      That it hath wakened hers!<br/>
</p>

<p>  But oh, rejoice, ye sisters pure,<br/>

      Who scarce can know her case—<br/>

  There is no sin but has its cure,<br/>

      Its all-consuming grace!<br/>
</p>

<p>  He did not leave her soul in hell,<br/>

      'Mong shards the silver dove;<br/>

  But raised her pure that she might tell<br/>

      Her sisters how to love!<br/>
</p>

<p>  She gave him all your best love can!<br/>

      Despised, rejected, sad—<br/>

  Sure, never yet had mighty man<br/>

      Such homage as he had!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Jesus, by whose forgiveness sweet,<br/>

      Her love grew so intense,<br/>

  Earth's sinners all come round thy feet:<br/>

      Lord, make no difference!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-song-in-a-dream" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Song in a Dream</h2>
I dreamed of a song, I heard it sung;
In the ear that sleeps not its music rung.
And the tones were upheld by harmonies deep,
Where the spirit floated; yea, soared, on their sweep
With each wild unearthly word and tone,
Upward, it knew not whither bound,
In a calm delirium of mystic sound--
Up, where the Genius of Thought alone
Loveth in silence to drink his fill
Of dews that from unknown clouds distil.
A woman's voice the deep echoes awoke,
In the caverns and solitudes of my soul;
But such a voice had never broke
Through the sea of sounds that about us roll,
Choking the ear in the daylight strife.
There was sorrow and triumph, and death and life
In each chord-note of that prophet-song,
Blended in one harmonious throng:
Such a chant, ere my voice has fled from death,
Be it mine to mould of the parting breath.
		</article>
		<article id="songs-of-the-days-and-nights" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Songs of the Days and Nights</h2>
<h3><i>SONGS OF THE SUMMER DAYS</i>.</h3>

<h4>  I.</h4>

<p>  A glory on the chamber wall!<br/>

    A glory in the brain!<br/>

  Triumphant floods of glory fall<br/>

    On heath, and wold, and plain.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Earth lieth still in hopeless bliss;<br/>

    She has, and seeks no more;<br/>

  Forgets that days come after this,<br/>

    Forgets the days before.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Each ripple waves a flickering fire<br/>

    Of gladness, as it runs;<br/>

  They laugh and flash, and leap and spire,<br/>

    And toss ten thousand suns.<br/>
</p>

<p>  But hark! low, in the world within,<br/>

    One sad aeolian tone:<br/>

  "Ah! shall we ever, ever win<br/>

    A summer of our own?"<br/>
</p>

<h4>  II.</h4>

<p>  A morn of winds and swaying trees—<br/>

    Earth's jubilance rushing out!<br/>

  The birds are fighting with the breeze;<br/>

    The waters heave about.<br/>
</p>

<p>  White clouds are swept across the sky,<br/>

    Their shadows o'er the graves;<br/>

  Purpling the green, they float and fly<br/>

    Athwart the sunny waves.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The long grass—an earth-rooted sea—<br/>

    Mimics the watery strife.<br/>

  To boat or horse? Wild motion we<br/>

    Shall find harmonious life.<br/>
</p>

<p>  But whither? Roll and sweep and bend<br/>

    Suffice for Nature's part;<br/>

  But motion to an endless end<br/>

    Is needful for our heart.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  III.</h4>

<p>  The morn awakes like brooding dove,<br/>

    With outspread wings of gray;<br/>

  Her feathery clouds close in above,<br/>

    And roof a sober day.<br/>
</p>

<p>  No motion in the deeps of air!<br/>

    No trembling in the leaves!<br/>

  A still contentment everywhere,<br/>

    That neither laughs nor grieves!<br/>
</p>

<p>  A film of sheeted silver gray<br/>

    Shuts in the ocean's hue;<br/>

  White-winged feluccas cleave their way<br/>

    In paths of gorgeous blue.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Dream on, dream on, O dreamy day,<br/>

    Thy very clouds are dreams!<br/>

  Yon child is dreaming far away—<br/>

    He is not where he seems.<br/>
</p>

<h5>  IV.</h5>

<p>  The lark is up, his faith is strong,<br/>

    He mounts the morning air;<br/>

  Lone voice of all the creature throng,<br/>

    He sings the morning prayer.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Slow clouds from north and south appear,<br/>

    Black-based, with shining slope;<br/>

  In sullen forms their might they rear,<br/>

    And climb the vaulted cope.<br/>
</p>

<p>  A lightning flash, a thunder boom!—<br/>

    Nor sun nor clouds are there;<br/>

  A single, all-pervading gloom<br/>

    Hangs in the heavy air.<br/>
</p>

<p>  A weeping, wasting afternoon<br/>

    Weighs down the aspiring corn;<br/>

  Amber and red, the sunset soon<br/>

    Leads back to golden morn.<br/>
</p>

<h1><i>SONGS OF THE SUMMER NIGHTS</i>.</h1>

<h4>  I.</h4>

<p>  The dreary wind of night is out,<br/>

    Homeless and wandering slow;<br/>

  O'er pale seas moaning like a doubt,<br/>

    It breathes, but will not blow.<br/>
</p>

<p>  It sighs from out the helpless past,<br/>

    Where doleful things abide;<br/>

  Gray ghosts of dead thought sail aghast<br/>

    Across its ebbing tide.<br/>
</p>

<p>  O'er marshy pools it faints and flows,<br/>

    All deaf and dumb and blind;<br/>

  O'er moor and mountain aimless goes—<br/>

    The listless woesome wind!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Nay, nay!—breathe on, sweet wind of night!<br/>

    The sigh is all in me;<br/>

  Flow, fan, and blow, with gentle might,<br/>

    Until I wake and see.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  II.</h4>

<p>  The west is broken into bars<br/>

    Of orange, gold, and gray;<br/>

  Gone is the sun, fast come the stars,<br/>

    And night infolds the day.<br/>
</p>

<p>  My boat glides with the gliding stream,<br/>

    Following adown its breast<br/>

  One flowing mirrored amber gleam,<br/>

    The death-smile of the west.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The river moves; the sky is still,<br/>

    No ceaseless quest it knows:<br/>

  Thy bosom swells, thy fair eyes fill<br/>

    At sight of its repose.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The ripples run; all patient sit<br/>

    The stars above the night.<br/>

  In shade and gleam the waters flit:<br/>

    The heavens are changeless bright!<br/>
</p>

<h4>  III.</h4>

<p>  Alone I lie, buried amid<br/>

    The long luxurious grass;<br/>

  The bats flit round me, born and hid<br/>

    In twilight's wavering mass.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The fir-top floats, an airy isle,<br/>

    High o'er the mossy ground;<br/>

  Harmonious silence breathes the while<br/>

    In scent instead of sound.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The flaming rose glooms swarthy red;<br/>

    The borage gleams more blue;<br/>

  Dim-starred with white, a flowery bed<br/>

    Glimmers the rich dusk through.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Hid in the summer grass I lie,<br/>

    Lost in the great blue cave;<br/>

  My body gazes at the sky,<br/>

    And measures out its grave.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  IV.</h4>

<p>  What art thou, gathering dusky cool,<br/>

    In slow gradation fine?<br/>

  Death's lovely shadow, flickering full<br/>

    Of eyes about to shine.<br/>
</p>

<p>  When weary Day goes down below,<br/>

    Thou leanest o'er his grave,<br/>

  Revolving all the vanished show<br/>

    The gracious splendour gave.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Or art thou not she rather—say—<br/>

    Dark-browed, with luminous eyes,<br/>

  Of whom is born the mighty Day,<br/>

    That fights and saves and dies?<br/>
</p>

<p>  For action sleeps with sleeping light;<br/>

    Calm thought awakes with thee:<br/>

  The soul is then a summer night,<br/>

    With stars that shine and see.<br/>
</p>

<h1><i>SONGS OF THE AUTUMN DAYS</i>.</h1>

<h4>  I.</h4>

<p>  We bore him through the golden land,<br/>

    One early harvest morn;<br/>

  The corn stood ripe on either hand—<br/>

    He knew all about the corn.<br/>
</p>

<p>  How shall the harvest gathered be<br/>

    Without him standing by?<br/>

  Without him walking on the lea,<br/>

    The sky is scarce a sky.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The year's glad work is almost done;<br/>

    The land is rich in fruit;<br/>

  Yellow it floats in air and sun—<br/>

    Earth holds it by the root.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Why should earth hold it for a day<br/>

    When harvest-time is come?<br/>

  Death is triumphant o'er decay,<br/>

    And leads the ripened home.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  II.</h4>

<p>  And though the sun be not so warm,<br/>

    His shining is not lost;<br/>

  Both corn and hope, of heart and farm,<br/>

    Lie hid from coming frost.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The sombre woods are richly sad,<br/>

    Their leaves are red and gold:<br/>

  Are thoughts in solemn splendour clad<br/>

    Signs that we men grow old?<br/>
</p>

<p>  Strange odours haunt the doubtful brain<br/>

    From fields and days gone by;<br/>

  And mournful memories again<br/>

    Are born, are loved, and die.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The mornings clear, the evenings cool<br/>

    Foretell no wintry wars;<br/>

  The day of dying leaves is full,<br/>

    The night of glowing stars.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  III.</h4>

<p>  'Tis late before the sun will rise,<br/>

    And early he will go;<br/>

  Gray fringes hang from the gray skies,<br/>

    And wet the ground below.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Red fruit has followed golden corn;<br/>

    The leaves are few and sere;<br/>

  My thoughts are old as soon as born,<br/>

    And chill with coming fear.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The winds lie sick; no softest breath<br/>

    Floats through the branches bare;<br/>

  A silence as of coming death<br/>

    Is growing in the air.<br/>
</p>

<p>  But what must fade can bear to fade—<br/>

    Was born to meet the ill:<br/>

  Creep on, old Winter, deathly shade!<br/>

    We sorrow, and are still.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  IV.</h4>

<p>  There is no longer any heaven<br/>

    To glorify our clouds;<br/>

  The rising vapours downward driven<br/>

    Come home in palls and shrouds.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The sun himself is ill bested<br/>

    A heavenly sign to show;<br/>

  His radiance, dimmed to glowing red,<br/>

    Can hardly further go.<br/>
</p>

<p>  An earthy damp, a churchyard gloom,<br/>

    Pervade the moveless air;<br/>

  The year is sinking to its tomb,<br/>

    And death is everywhere.<br/>
</p>

<p>  But while sad thoughts together creep,<br/>

    Like bees too cold to sting,<br/>

  God's children, in their beds asleep,<br/>

    Are dreaming of the spring.<br/>
</p>

<h1><i>SONGS OF THE AUTUMN NIGHTS</i>.</h1>

<h4>  I.</h4>

<p>  O night, send up the harvest moon<br/>

    To walk about the fields,<br/>

  And make of midnight magic noon<br/>

    On lonely tarns and wealds.<br/>
</p>

<p>  In golden ranks, with golden crowns,<br/>

    All in the yellow land,<br/>

  Old solemn kings in rustling gowns,<br/>

    The shocks moon-charmed stand.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Sky-mirror she, afloat in space,<br/>

    Beholds our coming morn:<br/>

  Her heavenly joy hath such a grace,<br/>

    It ripens earthly corn;<br/>
</p>

<p>  Like some lone saint with upward eyes,<br/>

    Lost in the deeps of prayer:<br/>

  The people still their prayers and sighs,<br/>

    And gazing ripen there.<br/>
</p>

<h5>  II.</h5>

<p>  So, like the corn moon-ripened last,<br/>

    Would I, weary and gray,<br/>

  On golden memories ripen fast,<br/>

    And ripening pass away.<br/>
</p>

<p>  In an old night so let me die;<br/>

    A slow wind out of doors;<br/>

  A waning moon low in the sky;<br/>

    A vapour on the moors;<br/>
</p>

<p>  A fire just dying in the gloom;<br/>

    Earth haunted all with dreams;<br/>

  A sound of waters in the room;<br/>

    A mirror's moony gleams;<br/>
</p>

<p>  And near me, in the sinking night,<br/>

    More thoughts than move in me—<br/>

  Forgiving wrong, and loving right,<br/>

    And waiting till I see.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  III.</h4>

<p>  Across the stubble glooms the wind;<br/>

    High sails the lated crow;<br/>

  The west with pallid green is lined;<br/>

    Fog tracks the river's flow.<br/>
</p>

<p>  My heart is cold and sad; I moan,<br/>

    Yet care not for my grief;<br/>

  The summer fervours all are gone;<br/>

    The roses are but leaf.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Old age is coming, frosty, hoar;<br/>

    The snows of time will fall;<br/>

  My jubilance, dream-like, no more<br/>

    Returns for any call!<br/>
</p>

<p>  O lapsing heart! thy feeble strain<br/>

    Sends up the blood so spare,<br/>

  That my poor withering autumn brain<br/>

    Sees autumn everywhere!<br/>
</p>

<h4>  IV.</h4>

<p>  Lord of my life! if I am blind,<br/>

    I reck not—thou canst see;<br/>

  I well may wait my summer mind,<br/>

    When I am sure of thee!<br/>
</p>

<p>  <i>I</i> made no brave bright suns arise,<br/>

    Veiled up no sweet gray eves;<br/>

  <i>I</i> hung no rose-lamps, lit no eyes,<br/>

    Sent out no windy leaves!<br/>
</p>

<p>  I said not "I will cast a charm<br/>

    These gracious forms around;"<br/>

  My heart with unwilled love grew warm;<br/>

    I took but what I found!<br/>
</p>

<p>  When cold winds range my winter-night,<br/>

    Be thou my summer-door;<br/>

  Keep for me all my young delight,<br/>

    Till I am old no more.<br/>
</p>

<h1><i>SONGS OF THE WINTER DAYS</i>.</h1>

<h4>  I.</h4>

<p>  The sky has turned its heart away,<br/>

    The earth its sorrow found;<br/>

  The daisies turn from childhood's play,<br/>

    And creep into the ground.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The earth is black and cold and hard;<br/>

    Thin films of dry white ice,<br/>

  Across the rugged wheel-tracks barred,<br/>

    The children's feet entice.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Dark flows the stream, as if it mourned<br/>

    The winter in the land;<br/>

  With idle icicles adorned,<br/>

    That mill-wheel soon will stand.<br/>
</p>

<p>  But, friends, to say 'tis cold, and part,<br/>

    Is to let in the cold;<br/>

  We'll make a summer of the heart,<br/>

    And laugh at winter old.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  II.</h4>

<p>  With vague dead gleam the morning white<br/>

    Comes through the window-panes;<br/>

  The clouds have fallen all the night,<br/>

    Without the noise of rains.<br/>
</p>

<p>  As of departing, unseen ghost,<br/>

    Footprints go from the door;<br/>

  The man himself must long be lost<br/>

    Who left those footprints hoar!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Yet follow thou; tread down the snow;<br/>

    Leave all the road behind;<br/>

  Heed not the winds that steely blow,<br/>

    Heed not the sky unkind;<br/>
</p>

<p>  For though the glittering air grow dark,<br/>

    The snow will shine till morn;<br/>

  And long ere then one dear home-spark<br/>

    Will winter laugh to scorn.<br/>
</p>

<h5>  III.</h5>

<p>  Oh wildly wild the roaring blast<br/>

    Torments the fallen snow!<br/>

  The wintry storms are up at last,<br/>

    And care not how they go!<br/>
</p>

<p>  In foam-like wreaths the water hoar,<br/>

    Rapt whistling in the air,<br/>

  Gleams through the dismal twilight frore;<br/>

    A region in despair,<br/>
</p>

<p>  A spectral ocean lies outside,<br/>

    Torn by a tempest dark;<br/>

  Its ghostly billows, dim descried,<br/>

    Leap on my stranded bark.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Death-sheeted figures, long and white,<br/>

    Rave driving through the spray;<br/>

  Or, bosomed in the ghastly night,<br/>

    Shriek doom-cries far away.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  IV.</h4>

<p>  A morning clear, with frosty light<br/>

    From sunbeams late and low;<br/>

  They shine upon the snow so white,<br/>

    And shine back from the snow.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Down tusks of ice one drop will go,<br/>

    Nor fall: at sunny noon<br/>

  'Twill hang a diamond—fade, and grow<br/>

    An opal for the moon.<br/>
</p>

<p>  And when the bright sad sun is low<br/>

    Behind the mountain-dome,<br/>

  A twilight wind will come and blow<br/>

    Around the children's home,<br/>
</p>

<p>  And puff and waft the powdery snow,<br/>

    As feet unseen did pass;<br/>

  While, waiting in its bed below,<br/>

    Green lies the summer grass.<br/>
</p>

<h2><i>SONGS OF THE WINTER NIGHTS</i>.</h2>

<h4>  I.</h4>

<p>  Back shining from the pane, the fire<br/>

    Seems outside in the snow:<br/>

  So love set free from love's desire<br/>

    Lights grief of long ago.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The dark is thinned with snow-sheen fine,<br/>

    The earth bedecked with moon;<br/>

  Out on the worlds we surely shine<br/>

    More radiant than in June!<br/>
</p>

<p>  In the white garden lies a heap<br/>

    As brown as deep-dug mould:<br/>

  A hundred partridges that keep<br/>

    Each other from the cold.<br/>
</p>

<p>  My father gives them sheaves of corn,<br/>

    For shelter both and food:<br/>

  High hope in me was early born,<br/>

    My father was so good.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  II.</h4>

<p>  The frost weaves ferns and sultry palms<br/>

    Across my clouded pane;<br/>

  Weaves melodies of ancient psalms<br/>

    All through my passive brain.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Quiet ecstasy fills heart and head:<br/>

    My father is in the room;<br/>

  The very curtains of my bed<br/>

    Are from Love's sheltering loom!<br/>
</p>

<p>  The lovely vision melts away;<br/>

    I am a child no more;<br/>

  Work rises from the floor of play;<br/>

    Duty is at the door.<br/>
</p>

<p>  But if I face with courage stout<br/>

    The labour and the din,<br/>

  Thou, Lord, wilt let my mind go out<br/>

    My heart with thee stay in.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  III.</h4>

<p>  Up to my ear my soul doth run—<br/>

    Her other door is dark;<br/>

  There she can see without the sun,<br/>

    And there she sits to mark.<br/>
</p>

<p>  I hear the dull unheeding wind<br/>

    Mumble o'er heath and wold;<br/>

  My fancy leaves my brain behind,<br/>

    And floats into the cold.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Like a forgotten face that lies<br/>

    One of the speechless crowd,<br/>

  The earth lies spent, with frozen eyes,<br/>

    White-folded in her shroud.<br/>
</p>

<p>  O'er leafless woods and cornless farms,<br/>

    Dead rivers, fireless thorps,<br/>

  I brood, the heart still throbbing warm<br/>

    In Nature's wintered corpse.<br/>
</p>

<h5>  IV.</h5>

<p>  To all the world mine eyes are blind:<br/>

    Their drop serene is—night,<br/>

  With stores of snow piled up the wind<br/>

    An awful airy height.<br/>
</p>

<p>  And yet 'tis but a mote in the eye:<br/>

    The simple faithful stars<br/>

  Beyond are shining, careless high,<br/>

    Nor heed our storms and jars.<br/>
</p>

<p>  And when o'er storm and jar I climb—<br/>

    Beyond life's atmosphere,<br/>

  I shall behold the lord of time<br/>

    And space—of world and year.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Oh vain, far quest!—not thus my heart<br/>

    Shall ever find its goal!<br/>

  I turn me home—and there thou art,<br/>

    My Father, in my soul!<br/>
</p>

<h1><i>SONGS OF THE SPRING DAYS</i>.</h1>

<h4>  I.</h4>

<p>  A gentle wind, of western birth<br/>

    On some far summer sea,<br/>

  Wakes daisies in the wintry earth,<br/>

    Wakes hopes in wintry me.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The sun is low; the paths are wet,<br/>

    And dance with frolic hail;<br/>

  The trees—their spring-time is not yet—<br/>

    Swing sighing in the gale.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Young gleams of sunshine peep and play;<br/>

    Clouds shoulder in between;<br/>

  I scarce believe one coming day<br/>

    The earth will all be green.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The north wind blows, and blasts, and raves,<br/>

    And flaps his snowy wing:<br/>

  Back! toss thy bergs on arctic waves;<br/>

    Thou canst not bar our spring.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  II.</h4>

<p>  Up comes the primrose, wondering;<br/>

    The snowdrop droopeth by;<br/>

  The holy spirit of the spring<br/>

    Is working silently.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Soft-breathing breezes woo and wile<br/>

    The later children out;<br/>

  O'er woods and farms a sunny smile<br/>

    Is flickering about.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The earth was cold, hard-hearted, dull;<br/>

    To death almost she slept:<br/>

  Over her, heaven grew beautiful,<br/>

    And forth her beauty crept.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Showers yet must fall, and waters grow<br/>

    Dark-wan with furrowing blast;<br/>

  But suns will shine, and soft winds blow,<br/>

    Till the year flowers at last.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  III.</h4>

<p>  The sky is smiling over me,<br/>

    Hath smiled away the frost;<br/>

  White daisies star the sky-like lea,<br/>

    With buds the wood's embossed.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Troops of wild flowers gaze at the sky<br/>

    Up through the latticed boughs;<br/>

  Till comes the green cloud by and by,<br/>

    It is not time to house.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Yours is the day, sweet bird—sing on;<br/>

    The winter is forgot;<br/>

  Like an ill dream 'tis over and gone:<br/>

    Pain that is past, is not.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Joy that was past is yet the same:<br/>

    If care the summer brings,<br/>

  'Twill only be another name<br/>

    For love that broods, not sings.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  IV.</h4>

<p>  Blow on me, wind, from west and south;<br/>

    Sweet summer-spirit, blow!<br/>

  Come like a kiss from dear child's mouth,<br/>

    Who knows not what I know.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The earth's perfection dawneth soon;<br/>

    Ours lingereth alway;<br/>

  We have a morning, not a noon;<br/>

    Spring, but no summer gay.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Rose-blotted eve, gold-branded morn<br/>

    Crown soon the swift year's life:<br/>

  In us a higher hope is born,<br/>

    And claims a longer strife.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Will heaven be an eternal spring<br/>

    With summer at the door?<br/>

  Or shall we one day tell its king<br/>

    That we desire no more?<br/>
</p>

<h1><i>SONGS OF THE SPRING NIGHTS</i>.</h1>

<h4>  I.</h4>

<p>  The flush of green that dyed the day<br/>

    Hath vanished in the moon;<br/>

  Flower-scents float stronger out, and play<br/>

    An unborn, coming tune.<br/>
</p>

<p>  One southern eve like this, the dew<br/>

    Had cooled and left the ground;<br/>

  The moon hung half-way from the blue,<br/>

    No disc, but conglobed round;<br/>
</p>

<p>  Light-leaved acacias, by the door,<br/>

    Bathed in the balmy air,<br/>

  Clusters of blossomed moonlight bore,<br/>

    And breathed a perfume rare;<br/>
</p>

<p>  Great gold-flakes from the starry sky<br/>

    Fell flashing on the deep:<br/>

  One scent of moist earth floating by,<br/>

    Almost it made me weep.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  II.</h4>

<p>  Those gorgeous stars were not my own,<br/>

    They made me alien go!<br/>

  The mother o'er her head had thrown<br/>

    A veil I did not know!<br/>
</p>

<p>  The moon-blanched fields that seaward went,<br/>

    The palm-flung, dusky shades,<br/>

  Bore flowering grasses, knotted, bent,<br/>

    No slender, spear-like blades.<br/>
</p>

<p>  I longed to see the starry host<br/>

    Afar in fainter blue;<br/>

  But plenteous grass I missed the most,<br/>

    With daisies glimmering through.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The common things were not the same!<br/>

    I longed across the foam:<br/>

  From dew-damp earth that odour came—<br/>

    I knew the world my home.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  III.</h4>

<p>  The stars are glad in gulfy space—<br/>

    Friendly the dark to them!<br/>

  From day's deep mine, their hiding-place,<br/>

    Night wooeth every gem.<br/>
</p>

<p>  A thing for faith 'mid labour's jar,<br/>

    When up the day is furled,<br/>

  Shines in the sky a light afar,<br/>

    Mayhap a home-filled world.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Sometimes upon the inner sky<br/>

    We catch a doubtful shine:<br/>

  A mote or star? A flash in the eye<br/>

    Or jewel of God's mine?<br/>
</p>

<p>  A star to us, all glimmer and glance,<br/>

    May teem with seraphim:<br/>

  A fancy to our ignorance<br/>

    May be a truth to Him.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  IV.</h4>

<p>  The night is damp and warm and still,<br/>

    And soft with summer dreams;<br/>

  The buds are bursting at their will,<br/>

    And shy the half moon gleams.<br/>
</p>

<p>  My soul is cool, as bathed within<br/>

    By dews that silent weep—<br/>

  Like child that has confessed his sin,<br/>

    And now will go to sleep.<br/>
</p>

<p>  My body ages, form and hue;<br/>

    But when the spring winds blow,<br/>

  My spirit stirs and buds anew,<br/>

    Younger than long ago.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Lord, make me more a child, and more,<br/>

    Till Time his own end bring,<br/>

  And out of every winter sore<br/>

    I pass into thy spring.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-three-horses" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Three Horses</h2>
<p>What shall I be?—I will be a knight<br/>

  Walled up in armour black,<br/>

With a sword of sharpness, a hammer of might.<br/>

  And a spear that will not crack—<br/>

So black, so blank, no glimmer of light<br/>

  Will betray my darkling track.<br/>
</p>

<p>Saddle my coal-black steed, my men,<br/>

  Fittest for sunless work;<br/>

Old Night is steaming from her den,<br/>

  And her children gather and lurk;<br/>

Bad things are creeping from the fen,<br/>

  And sliding down the murk.<br/>
</p>

<p>Let him go!—let him go! Let him plunge!—Keep away!<br/>

  He's a foal of the third seal's brood!<br/>

Gaunt with armour, in grim array<br/>

  Of poitrel and frontlet-hood,<br/>

Let him go, a living castle, away—<br/>

  Right for the evil wood.<br/>
</p>

<p>I and Ravenwing on the course,<br/>

  Heavy in fighting gear—<br/>

Woe to the thing that checks our force,<br/>

  That meets us in career!<br/>

Giant, enchanter, devil, or worse—<br/>

  What cares the couched spear!<br/>
</p>

<p>Slow through the trees zigzag I ride.<br/>

  See! the goblins!—to and fro!<br/>

From the skull of the dark, on either side,<br/>

  See the eyes of a dragon glow!<br/>

From the thickets the silent serpents glide—<br/>

  I pass them, I let them go;<br/>
</p>

<p>For somewhere in the evil night<br/>

  A little one cries alone;<br/>

An aged knight, outnumbered in fight,<br/>

  But for me will be stricken prone;<br/>

A lady with terror is staring white,<br/>

  For her champion is overthrown.<br/>
</p>

<p>The child in my arms, to my hauberk prest,<br/>

  Like a trembling bird will cling;<br/>

I will cover him over, in iron nest,<br/>

  With my shield, my one steel wing,<br/>

And bear him home to his mother's breast,<br/>

  A radiant, rescued thing.<br/>
</p>

<p>Spur in flank, and lance in rest,<br/>

  On the old knight's foes I flash;<br/>

The caitiffs I scatter to east and west<br/>

  With clang and hurtle and crash;<br/>

Leave them the law, as knaves learn it best,<br/>

  In bruise, and breach, and gash.<br/>
</p>

<p>The lady I lift on my panting steed;<br/>

  On the pommel she holds my mace;<br/>

Hand on bridle I gently lead<br/>

  The horse at a gentle pace;<br/>

The thickets with martel-axe I heed,<br/>

  For the wood is an evil place.<br/>
</p>

<p>What treasure is there in manly might<br/>

  That hid in the bosom lies!<br/>

Who for the crying will not fight<br/>

  Had better be he that cries!<br/>

A man is a knight that loves the right<br/>

  And mounts for it till he dies.<br/>
</p>

<p>Alas, 'tis a dream of ages hoar!<br/>

  In the fens no dragons won;<br/>

No giants from moated castles roar;<br/>

  Through the forest wide roadways run;<br/>

Of all the deeds they did of yore<br/>

  Not one is left to be done!<br/>
</p>

<p>If I should saddle old Ravenwing<br/>

  And hie me out at night,<br/>

Scared little birds away would spring<br/>

  An ill-shot arrow's flight:<br/>

The idle fancy away I fling,<br/>

  Now I will dream aright!<br/>
</p>

<p>Let a youth bridle Twilight, my dapple-gray,<br/>

  With broad rein and snaffle bit;<br/>

He must bring him round at break of day<br/>

  When the shadows begin to flit,<br/>

When the darkness begins to dream away,<br/>

  And the owls begin to sit.<br/>
</p>

<p>Ungraithed in plate or mail I go,<br/>

  With only my sword—gray-blue<br/>

Like the scythe of the dawning come to mow<br/>

  The night-sprung shadows anew<br/>

From the gates of the east, that, fair and slow,<br/>

  Maid Morning may walk through.<br/>
</p>

<p>I seek no forest with darkness grim,<br/>

  To the open land I ride;<br/>

Low light, from the broad horizon's brim,<br/>

  Lies wet on the flowing tide,<br/>

And mottles with shadows dun and dim<br/>

  The mountain's rugged side.<br/>
</p>

<p>Steadily, hasteless, o'er valley and hill.<br/>

  O'er the moor, along the beach,<br/>

We ride, nor slacken our pace until<br/>

  Some city of men we reach;<br/>

There, in the market, my horse stands still,<br/>

  And I lift my voice and preach.<br/>
</p>

<p>Wealth and poverty, age and youth<br/>

  Around me gather and throng;<br/>

I tell them of justice, of wisdom, of truth,<br/>

  Of mercy, and law, and wrong;<br/>

My words are moulded by right and ruth<br/>

  To a solemn-chanted song.<br/>
</p>

<p>They bring me questions which would be scanned,<br/>

  That strife may be forgot;<br/>

Swerves my balance to neither hand,<br/>

  The poor I favour no jot;<br/>

If a man withstand, out sweeps my brand.<br/>

  I slay him upon the spot.<br/>
</p>

<p>But what if my eye have in it a beam<br/>

  And therefore spy his mote?<br/>

Righteousness only, wisdom supreme<br/>

  Can tell the sheep from the goat!<br/>

Not thus I dream a wise man's dream,<br/>

  Not thus take Wrong by the throat!<br/>
</p>

<p>Lead Twilight home. I dare not kill;<br/>

  The sword myself would scare.—<br/>

When the sun looks over the eastern hill,<br/>

  Bring out my snow-white mare:<br/>

One labour is left which no one will<br/>

  Deny me the right to share!<br/>
</p>

<p>Take heed, my men, from crest to heel<br/>

  Snow-white have no speck;<br/>

No curb, no bit her mouth must feel,<br/>

  No tightening rein her neck;<br/>

No saddle-girth drawn with buckle of steel<br/>

  Shall her mighty breathing check!<br/>
</p>

<p>Lay on her a cloth of silver sheen,<br/>

  Bring me a robe of white;<br/>

Wherever we go we must be seen<br/>

  By the shining of our light—<br/>

A glistening splendour in forest green,<br/>

  A star on the mountain-height.<br/>
</p>

<p>With jar and shudder the gates unclose;<br/>

  Out in the sun she leaps!<br/>

A unit of light and power she goes<br/>

  Levelling vales and steeps:<br/>

The wind around her eddies and blows,<br/>

  Before and behind her sleeps.<br/>
</p>

<p>Oh joy, oh joy to ride the world<br/>

  And glad, good tidings bear!<br/>

A flag of peace on the winds unfurled<br/>

  Is the mane of my shining mare:<br/>

To the sound of her hoofs, lo, the dead stars hurled<br/>

  Quivering adown the air!<br/>
</p>

<p>Oh, the sun and the wind! Oh, the life and the love!<br/>

  Where the serpent swung all day<br/>

The loud dove coos to the silent dove;<br/>

  Where the web-winged dragon lay<br/>

In its hole beneath, on the rock above<br/>

  Merry-tongued children play.<br/>
</p>

<p>With eyes of light the maidens look up<br/>

  As they sit in the summer heat<br/>

Twining green blade with golden cup—<br/>

  They see, and they rise to their feet;<br/>

I call aloud, for I must not stop,<br/>

  "Good tidings, my sisters sweet!"<br/>
</p>

<p>For mine is a message of holy mirth<br/>

  To city and land of corn;<br/>

Of praise for heaviness, plenty for dearth,<br/>

  For darkness a shining morn:<br/>

Clap hands, ye billows; be glad, O earth,<br/>

  For a child, a child is born!<br/>
</p>

<p>Lo, even the just shall live by faith!<br/>

  None argue of mine and thine!<br/>

Old Self shall die an ecstatic death<br/>

  And be born a thing divine,<br/>

For God's own being and God's own breath<br/>

  Shall be its bread and wine.<br/>
</p>

<p>Ambition shall vanish, and Love be king,<br/>

  And Pride to his darkness hie;<br/>

Yea, for very love of a living thing<br/>

  A man would forget and die,<br/>

If very love were not the spring<br/>

  Whence life springs endlessly!<br/>
</p>

<p>The myrtle shall grow where grew the thorn;<br/>

  Earth shall be young as heaven;<br/>

The heart with remorse or anger torn<br/>

  Shall weep like a summer even;<br/>

For to us a child, a child is born,<br/>

  Unto us a son is given!<br/>
</p>

<p>Lord, with thy message I dare not ride!<br/>

  I am a fool, a beast!<br/>

The little ones only from thy side<br/>

  Go forth to publish thy feast!<br/>

And I, where but sons and daughters abide,<br/>

  Would have walked about, a priest!<br/>
</p>

<p>Take Snow-white back to her glimmering stall;<br/>

  There let her stand and feed!—<br/>

I am overweening, ambitious, small,<br/>

  A creature of pride and greed!<br/>

Let me wash the hoofs, let me be the thrall,<br/>

  Jesus, of thy white steed!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-golden-key" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Golden Key</h2>
<p>From off the earth the vapours curled,<br/>

  Went up to meet their joy;<br/>

The boy awoke, and all the world<br/>

  Was waiting for the boy!<br/>
</p>

<p>The sky, the water, the wide earth<br/>

  Was full of windy play—<br/>

Shining and fair, alive with mirth,<br/>

  All for his holiday!<br/>
</p>

<p>The hill said "Climb me;" and the wood<br/>

  "Come to my bosom, child;<br/>

Mine is a merry gamboling brood,<br/>

  Come, and with them go wild."<br/>
</p>

<p>The shadows with the sunlight played,<br/>

  The birds were singing loud;<br/>

The hill stood up with pines arrayed—<br/>

  He ran to join the crowd.<br/>
</p>

<p>But long ere noon, dark grew the skies,<br/>

  Pale grew the shrinking sun:<br/>

"How soon," he said, "for clouds to rise<br/>

  When day was but begun!"<br/>
</p>

<p>The wind grew rough; a wilful power<br/>

  It swept o'er tree and town;<br/>

The boy exulted for an hour,<br/>

  Then weary sat him down.<br/>
</p>

<p>And as he sat the rain began,<br/>

  And rained till all was still:<br/>

He looked, and saw a rainbow span<br/>

  The vale from hill to hill.<br/>
</p>

<p>He dried his tears. "Ah, now," he said,<br/>

  "The storm was good, I see!<br/>

Yon pine-dressed hill, upon its head<br/>

  I'll find the golden key!"<br/>
</p>

<p>He thrid the copse, he climbed the fence,<br/>

  At last the top did scale;<br/>

But, lo, the rainbow, vanished thence,<br/>

  Was shining in the vale!<br/>
</p>

<p>"Still, here it stood! yes, here," he said,<br/>

  "Its very foot was set!<br/>

I saw this fir-tree through the red,<br/>

  This through the violet!"<br/>
</p>

<p>He searched and searched, while down the skies<br/>

  Went slow the slanting sun.<br/>

At length he lifted hopeless eyes,<br/>

  And day was nearly done!<br/>
</p>

<p>Beyond the vale, above the heath,<br/>

  High flamed the crimson west;<br/>

His mother's cottage lay beneath<br/>

  The sky-bird's rosy breast.<br/>
</p>

<p>"Oh, joy," he cried, "not <i>all</i> the way<br/>

  Farther from home we go!<br/>

The rain will come another day<br/>

  And bring another bow!"<br/>
</p>

<p>Long ere he reached his mother's cot,<br/>

  Still tiring more and more,<br/>

The red was all one cold gray blot,<br/>

  And night lay round the door.<br/>
</p>

<p>But when his mother stroked his head<br/>

  The night was grim in vain;<br/>

And when she kissed him in his bed<br/>

  The rainbow rose again.<br/>
</p>

<p>Soon, things that are and things that seem<br/>

  Did mingle merrily;<br/>

He dreamed, nor was it all a dream,<br/>

  His mother had the key.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="somnium-mystici" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Somnium Mystici</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">A Microcosm In Terza Rima</p>
			</hgroup>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Quiet I lay at last, and knew no more</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether I breathed or not, so worn I lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the death-struggle. What was yet before</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Neither I met, nor turned from it away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My only conscious being was the rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of pain gone dead—dead with the bygone day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And long I could have lingered all but blest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In that half-slumber. But there came a sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As of a door that opened—in the west</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Somewhere I thought it. As the hare the hound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The noise did start my eyelids and they rose.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I turned my eyes and looked. Then straight I found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was my chamber-door that did unclose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For a tall form up to my bedside drew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Grand was it, silent, its very walk repose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when I saw the countenance, I knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I was lying in my chamber dead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For this my brother—brothers such are few—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That now to greet me bowed his kingly head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had, many years agone, like holy dove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Returning, from his friends and kindred sped,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, leaving memories of mournful love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Passed vanishing behind the unseen veil;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And though I loved him, all high words above.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not for his loss then did I weep or wail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Knowing that here we live but in a tent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, seeking home, shall find it without fail.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feeble but eager, toward him my hands went—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I too was dead, so might the dead embrace!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Taking me by the shoulders down he bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lifted me. I was in sickly case,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, growing stronger, stood up on the floor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There turned, and once regarded my dead face</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With curious eyes: its brow contentment wore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But I had done with it, and turned away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I saw my brother by the open door,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And followed him out into the night blue-gray.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The houses stood up hard in limpid air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The moon hung in the heavens in half decay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the world to my bare feet lay bare.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now I had suffered in my life, as they</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Must suffer, and by slow years younger grow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From whom the false fool-self must drop away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Compact of greed and fear, which, gathered slow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Darkens the angel-self that, evermore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where no vain phantom in or out shall go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moveless beholds the Father—stands before</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The throne of revelation, waiting there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With wings low-drooping on the sapphire-floor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until it find the Father's ideal fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And be itself at last: not one small thorn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall needless any pilgrim's garments tear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And but to say I had suffered I would scorn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Save for the marvellous thing that next befell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sudden I grew aware I was new-born;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All pain had vanished in the absorbent swell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of some exalting peace that was my own;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As the moon dwelt in heaven did calmness dwell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At home in me, essential. The earth's moan</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lay all behind. Had I then lost my part</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In human griefs, dear part with them that groan?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"'Tis weariness!" I said; but with a start</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That set it trembling and yet brake it not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I found the peace was love. Oh, my rich heart!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, every time I spied a glimmering spot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of window pane, "There, in that silent room,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thought I, "mayhap sleeps human heart whose lot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is therefore dear to mine!" I cared for whom</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I saw not, had not seen, and might not see!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After the love crept prone its shadow-gloom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But instant a mightier love arose in me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As in an ocean a single wave will swell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And heaved the shadow to the centre: we</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had called it prayer, before on sleep I fell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It sank, and left my sea in holy calm:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I gave each man to God, and all was well.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in my heart stirred soft a sleeping psalm.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>No gentlest murmur through the city crept;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not one lone word my brother to me had spoken;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when beyond the city-gate we stept</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I knew the hovering silence would be broken.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A low night wind came whispering: through and through</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It did baptize me with the pledge and token</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of that soft spirit-wind which blows and blew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fans the human world since evermore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The very grass, cool to my feet, I knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be love also, and with the love I bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hold far sympathy, silent and sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As having known the secret from of yore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the eternal heart where all things meet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Feelings and thinkings, and where still they are bred.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sudden he stood, and with arrested feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I also. Like a half-sunned orb, his head</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Slow turned the bright side: lo, the brother-smile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ancient human glory on me shed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clothed in which Jesus came forth to wile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto his bosom every labouring soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all dividing passions to beguile</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To winsome death, and then on them to roll</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The blessed stone of the holy sepulchre!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Thank God," he said, "thou also now art whole</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sound and well! For the keen pain, and stir</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uneasy, and sore grief that came to us all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In that we knew not how the wine and myrrh</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could ever from the vinegar and gall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be parted, are deep sunk, yea drowned in God;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet the past not folded in a pall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But breathed upon, like Aaron's withered rod,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By a sweet light that brings the blossoms through,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Showing in dreariest paths that men have trod</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another's foot-prints, spotted of crimson hue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still on before wherever theirs did wend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yea, through the desert leading, of thyme and rue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The desert souls in which young lions rend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And roar—the passionate who, to be blest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ravin as bears, and do not gain their end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because that, save in God, there is no rest."</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Something my brother said to me like this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But how unlike it also, think, I pray:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His eyes were music, and his smile a kiss;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Himself the word, his speech was but a ray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the clear nimbus that with verity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of absolute utterance made a home-born day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of truth about him, lamping solemnly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And when he paused, there came a swift repose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Too high, too still to be called ecstasy—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A purple silence, lanced through in the close</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By such keen thought that, with a sudden smiling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It grew sheen silver, hearted with burning rose.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was a glory full of reconciling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of faithfulness, of love with no self-stain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of tenderness, and care, and brother-wiling</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Back to the bosom of a speechless gain.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I cannot tell how long we joyous talked,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For from my sense old time had vanished quite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Space dim-remaining—for onward still we walked.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No sun arose to blot the pale, still night—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still as the night of some great spongy stone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That turns but once an age betwixt the light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the huge shadow from its own bulk thrown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And long as that to me before whose face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Visions so many slid, and veils were blown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aside from the vague vast of Isis' grace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Innumerous thoughts yet throng that infinite hour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hopes which greater hopes unceasing chase,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I was all responsive to his power.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I saw my friends weep, wept, and let them weep;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I saw the growth of each grief-nurtured flower;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw the gardener watching—in their sleep</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wiping their tears with the napkin he had laid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wrapped by itself when he climbed Hades' steep;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What wonder then I saw nor was dismayed!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I saw the dull, degraded monsters nursed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In money-marshes, greedy men that preyed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the helpless, ground the feeblest worst;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yea all the human chaos, wild and waste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where he who will not leave what God hath cursed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now fruitless wallows, now is stung and chased</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By visions lovely and by longings dire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"But who believeth, he shall not make haste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even passing through the water and the fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or sad with memories of a better lot!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He, saved by hope, for all men will desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Knowing that God into a mustard-jot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May shut an aeon; give a world that lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wombed in its sun, a molten unorbed clot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One moment from the red rim to spin away</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Librating—ages to roll on weary wheel</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere it turn homeward, almost spent its day!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who knows love all, time nothing, he shall feel</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No anxious heart, shall lift no trembling hand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tender as air, but clothed in triple steel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He for his kind, in every age and land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hoping will live; and, to his labour bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Father's will shall, doing, understand."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So spake my brother as we onward went:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His words my heart received, as corn the lea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And answered with a harvest of content.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We came at last upon a lonesome sea.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And onward still he went, I following</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out on the water. But the water, lo,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like a thin sheet of glass, lay vanishing!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The starry host in glorious twofold show</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Looked up, looked down. The moment I saw this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A quivering fear thorough my heart did go:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unstayed I walked across a twin abyss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A hollow sphere of blue; nor floor was found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of questing eye, only the foot met the kiss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the cool water lightly crisping round</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The edges of the footsteps! Terror froze</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My fallen eyelids. But again the sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of my guide's voice on the still air arose:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Hast thou forgotten that we walk by faith?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For keenest sight but multiplies the shows.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lift up thine eyelids; take a valiant breath;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Terrified, dare the terror in God's name;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Step wider; trust the invisible. Can Death</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Avail no more to hearten up thy flame?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I trembled, but I opened wide mine eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And strode on the invisible sea. The same</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High moment vanished all my cowardice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And God was with me. The well-pleased stars</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Threw quivering smiles across the gulfy skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The white aurora flashed great scimitars</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From north to zenith; and again my guide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full turned on me his face. No prison-bars</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Latticed across a soul I there descried,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No weather-stains of grief; quiet age-long</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Brooded upon his forehead clear and wide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet from that face a pang shot, vivid and strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into my heart. For, though I saw him stand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Close to me in the void as one in a throng,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet on the border of some nameless land</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He stood afar; a still-eyed mystery</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Caught him whole worlds away. Though in my hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His hand I held, and, gazing earnestly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Searched in his countenance, as in a mine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For jewels of contentment, satisfy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My heart I could not. Seeming to divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My hidden trouble, gently he stooped and kissed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My forehead, and his arms did round me twine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And held me to his bosom. Still I missed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ancient earthly nearness, when we shared</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One bed, like birds that of no morrow wist;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Roamed our one father's farm; or, later, fared</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Along the dusty highways of the old clime.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Backward he drew, and, as if he had bared</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My soul, stood reading there a little time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While in his eyes tears gathered slow, like dew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That dims the grass at evening or at prime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But makes the stars clear-goldener in the blue:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on his lips a faint ethereal smile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hovered, as hangs the mist of its own hue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Trembling about a purple flower, the while</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Evening grows brown. "Brother! brother!" I cried;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But straight outbursting tears my words beguile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in my bosom all the utterance died.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A moment more he stood, then softly sighed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"I know thy pain; but this sorrow is far</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beyond my help," his voice at length replied</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To my beseeching tears. "Look at yon star</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Up from the low east half-way, all ablaze:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Think'st thou, because no cloud between doth mar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The liquid glory that from its visage rays,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou therefore knowest that same world on high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Its people and its orders and its ways?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"What meanest thou?" I said. "Thou know'st that</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would hold, not thy dear form, but the self-thee!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou art not near me! For thyself I cry!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Not the less near that nearer I shall be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I have a world within thou dost not know—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would I could make thee know it! but all of me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is thine, though thou not yet canst enter so</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into possession that betwixt us twain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The frolic homeliness of love should flow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As o'er the brim of childhood's cup again:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Away the deeper childhood first must wipe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That clouded consciousness which was our pain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When in thy breast the godlike hath grown ripe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thou, Christ's little one, art ten times more</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A child than when we played with drum and pipe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About our earthly father's happy door,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then—" He ceased not; his holy utterance still</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flowing went on, like spring from hidden store</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of wasteless waters; but I wept my fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor heeded much the comfort of his speech.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At length he said: "When first I clomb the hill—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With earthly words I heavenly things would reach—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where dwelleth now the man we used to call</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Father, whose voice, oh memory dear! did teach</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Us in our beds, when straight, as once a stall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Became a temple, holy grew the room,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Prone on the ground before him I did fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So grand he towered above me like a doom;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But now I look into the well-known face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fearless, yea, basking blessed in the bloom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his eternal youthfulness and grace."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"But something separates us," yet I cried;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Let light at least begin the dark to chase,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dark begin to waver and divide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And clear the path of vision. In the old time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When clouds one heart did from the other hide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wind would blow between! If I would climb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This foot must rise ere that can go up higher:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some big A teach me of the eternal prime."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He answered me: "Hearts that to love aspire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Must learn its mighty harmony ere they can</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Give out one perfect note in its great quire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thereto am I sent—oh, sent of one</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who makes the dumb for joy break out and sing:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He opens every door 'twixt man and man;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He to all inner chambers all will bring."</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>It was enough; Hope waked from dreary swound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Hope had ever been enough for me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To kennel driving grim Tomorrow's hound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From chains of school and mode she set me free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And urged my life to living.—On we went</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Across the stars that underlay the sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And came to a blown shore of sand and bent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beyond the sand a marshy moor we crossed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Silent—I, for I pondered what he meant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he, that sacred speech might not be lost—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And came at length upon an evil place:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Trees lay about like a half-buried host,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each in its desolate pool; some fearful race</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of creatures was not far, for howls and cries</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gurgling hisses rose. With even pace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Walking, "Fear not," he said, "for this way lies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our journey." On we went; and soon the ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Slow from the waste began a gentle rise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tender grass in patches, then all round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came clouding up, with its fresh homely tinge</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of softest green cold-flushing every mound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At length, of lowly shrubs a scattered fringe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And last, a gloomy forest, almost blind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For on its roof no sun-ray did impinge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that its very leaves did share the mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of a brown shadowless day. Not, all the year,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Once part its branches to let through a wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But all day long the unmoving trees appear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To ponder on the past, as men may do</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That for the future wait without a fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the past the coming present view.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I know not if for days many or few</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pathless we thrid the wood; for never sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Its sylvan-traceried windows peeping through,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mottled with brighter green the mosses dun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or meted with moving shadows Time the shade.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No life was there—not even a spider spun.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At length we came into a sky-roofed glade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An open level, in a circle shut</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By solemn trees that stood aside and made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Large room and lonely for a little hut</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By grassy sweeps wide-margined from the wood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">'Twas built of saplings old, that had been cut</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When those great trees no larger by them stood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thick with an ancient moss, it seemed to have grown</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus from the old brown earth, a covert rude,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Half-house, half-grave; half-lifted up, half-prone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To its low door my brother led me. "There</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is thy first school," he said; "there be thou shown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy pictured alphabet. Wake a mind of prayer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And praying enter." "But wilt thou not come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Brother?" I said. "No," said he. And I, "Where</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then shall I find thee? Thou wilt not leave me dumb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And a whole world of thoughts unuttered?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With half-sad smile and dewy eyes, and some</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Conflicting motions of his kingly head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He pointed to the open-standing door.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I entered: inward, lo, my shadow led!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I turned: his countenance shone like lightning hoar!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then slow he turned from me, and parted slow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like one unwilling, whom I should see no more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With voice nor hand said, <i>Farewell, I must go!</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But drew the clinging door hard to the post.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No dry leaves rustled 'neath his going; no</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Footfalls came back from the departing ghost.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He was no more. I laid me down and wept;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I dared not follow him, restrained the most</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By fear I should not see him if I leapt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out after him with cries of pleading love.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Close to the wall, in hopeless loss, I crept;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There cool sleep came, God's shadow, from above.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I woke, with calmness cleansed and sanctified—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The peace that filled my heart of old, when I</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Woke in my mother's lap; for since I died</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The past lay bare, even to the dreaming shy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That shadowed my yet gathering unborn brain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, marvelling, on the floor I saw, close by</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My elbow-pillowed head, as if it had lain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beside me all the time I dreamless lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A little pool of sunlight, which did stain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The earthen brown with gold; marvelling, I say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because, across the sea and through the wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No sun had shone upon me all the way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I rose, and through a chink the glade I viewed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all was dull as it had always been,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sunless every tree-top round it stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With hardly light enough to show it green;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet through the broken roof, serenely glad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By a rough hole entered that heavenly sheen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then I remembered in old years I had</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seen such a light—where, with dropt eyelids gloomed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sitting on such a floor, dark women sad</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a low barn-like house where lay entombed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their sires and children; only there the door</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was open to the sun, which entering plumed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With shadowy palms the stones that on the floor</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stood up like lidless chests—again to find</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the soul needs no brain, but keeps her store</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In hidden chambers of the eternal mind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thence backward ran my roused Memory</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Down the ever-opening vista—back to blind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anticipations while my soul did lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Closed in my mother's; forward thence through bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Spring morns of childhood, gay with hopes that fly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bird-like across their doming blue and white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To passionate summer noons, to saddened eves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of autumn rain, so on to wintred night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thence up once more to the dewy dawn that weaves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saffron and gold—weaves hope with still content,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wakes the worship that even wrong bereaves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of half its pain. And round her as she went</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hovered a sense as of an odour dear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose flower was far—as of a letter sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not yet arrived—a footstep coming near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, oh, how long delayed the lifting latch!—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As of a waiting sun, ready to peer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet peering not—as of a breathless watch</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Over a sleeping beauty—babbling rime</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About her lips, but no winged word to catch!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And here I lay, the child of changeful Time</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shut in the weary, changeless Evermore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A dull, eternal, fadeless, fruitless clime!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was this the dungeon of my sinning sore—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A gentle hell of loneliness, foredoomed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For such as I, whose love was yet the core</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all my being? The brown shadow gloomed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Persistent, faded, warm. No ripple ran</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Across the air, no roaming insect boomed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Alas," I cried, "I am no living man!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Better were darkness and the leave to grope</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than light that builds its own drear prison! Can</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This be the folding of the wings of Hope?"</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>That instant—through the branches overhead</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No sound of going went—a shadow fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Isled in the unrippled pool of sunlight fed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From some far fountain hid in heavenly dell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I looked, and in the low roofs broken place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A single snowdrop stood—a radiant bell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of silvery shine, softly subdued by grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of delicate green that made the white appear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet whiter. Blind it bowed its head a space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Half-timid—then, as in despite of fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unfolded its three rays. If it had swung</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Its pendent bell, and music golden clear—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Division just entrancing sounds among—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had flickered down as tender as flakes of snow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It had not shed more influence as it rung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than from its look alone did rain and flow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I knew the flower; perceived its human ways;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dim saw the secret that had made it grow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My heart supplied the music's golden phrase.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Light from the dark and snowdrops from the earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Life's resurrection out of gross decays,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The endless round of beauty's yearly birth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And nations' rise and fall—were in the flower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And read themselves in silence. Heavenly mirth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Awoke in my sad heart. For one whole hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I praised the God of snowdrops. But at height</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bliss gave way. Next, faith began to cower;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then the snowdrop vanished from my sight.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Last, I began in unbelief to say:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"No angel this! a snowdrop—nothing more!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A trifle which God's hands drew forth in play</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the tangled pond of chaos, dank and frore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Threw on the bank, and left blindly to breed!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A wilful fancy would have gathered store</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of evanescence from the pretty weed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">White, shapely—then divine! Conclusion lame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O'erdriven into the shelter of a creed!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not out of God, but nothingness it came:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Colourless, feeble, flying from life's heat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It has no honour, hardly shunning shame!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When, see, another shadow at my feet!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hopeless I lifted now my weary head:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why mock me with another heavenly cheat?—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A primrose fair, from its rough-blanketed bed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Laughed, lo, my unbelief to heavenly scorn!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A sun-child, just awake, no prayer yet said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Half rising from the couch where it was born,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And smiling to the world! I breathed again;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the midnight once more dawned the morn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fled the phantom Doubt with all his train.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I was a child once more, nor pondered life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thought not of what or how much. All my soul</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With sudden births of lovely things grew rife.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In peeps a daisy: on the instant roll</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rich lawny fields, with red tips crowding the green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Across the hollows, over ridge and knoll,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To where the rosy sun goes down serene.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From out of heaven in looks a pimpernel:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I walk in morning scents of thyme and bean;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dewdrops on every stalk and bud and bell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flash, like a jewel-orchard, many roods;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Glow ruby suns, which emerald suns would quell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Topaz saint-glories, sapphire beatitudes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Blaze in the slanting sunshine all around;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above, the high-priest-lark, o'er fields and woods—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rich-hearted with his five eggs on the ground—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sacrifice bore through the veil of light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Odour and colour offering up in sound.—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Filled heart-full thus with forms of lowly might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shapeful silences of lovely lore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I sat a child, happy with only sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for a time I needed nothing more.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Supine to the revelation I did lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Passive as prophet to his dreaming deep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or harp Aeolian to the breathing sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And blest as any child whom twilight sleep</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Holds half, and half lets go. But the new day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of higher need up-dawned with sudden leap:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Ah, flowers," I said, "ye are divinely gay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But your fair music is too far and fine!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ye are full cups, yet reach not to allay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The drought of those for human love who pine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As the hart for water-brooks!" At once a face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was looking in my face; its eyes through mine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were feeding me with tenderness and grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by their love I knew my mother's eyes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gazing in them, there grew in me apace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A longing grief, and love did swell and rise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till weeping I brake out and did bemoan</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My blameful share in bygone tears and cries:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"O mother, wilt thou plead for me?" I groan;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"I say not, plead with Christ, but plead with those</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, gathered now in peace about his throne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were near me when my heart was full of throes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And longings vain alter a flying bliss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which oft the fountain by the threshold froze:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They must forgive me, mother! Tell them this:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No more shall swell the love-dividing sigh;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Down at their feet I lay my selfishness."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The face grew passionate at this my cry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The gathering tears up to its eyebrims rose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It grew a trembling mist, that did not fly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But slow dissolved. I wept as one of those</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who wake outside the garden of their dream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, lo, the droop-winged hours laborious close</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its opal gates with stone and stake and beam.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But glory went that glory more might come.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behold a countless multitude—no less!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A host of faces, me besieging, dumb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the lone castle of my mournfulness!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had then my mother given the word I sent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gathering my dear ones from the shining press?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And had these others their love-aidance lent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For full assurance of the pardon prayed?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would they concentre love, with sweet intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On my self-love, to blast the evil shade?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ah, perfect vision! pledge of endless hope!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oh army of the holy spirit, arrayed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In comfort's panoply! For words I grope—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For clouds to catch your radiant dawn, my own,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tell your coming! From the highest cope</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of blue, down to my roof-breach came a cone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of faces and their eyes on love's will borne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bright heads down-bending like the forward blown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heavy with ripeness, golden ears of corn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By gentle wind on crowded harvest-field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All gazing toward my prison-hut forlorn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if with power of eyes they would have healed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My troubled heart, making it like their own</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which the bitter fountain had been sealed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the life-giving water flowed alone!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>With what I thus beheld, glorified then,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"God, let me love my fill and pass!" I sighed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dead, for love had almost died again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"O fathers, brothers, I am yours!" I cried;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"O mothers, sisters. I am nothing now</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Save as I am yours, and in you sanctified!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O men, O women, of the peaceful brow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And infinite abysses in the eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence God's ineffable gazes on me, how</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Care ye for me, impassioned and unwise?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oh ever draw my heart out after you!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ever, O grandeur, thus before me rise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I need nothing, not even for love will sue!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I am no more, and love is all in all!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Henceforth there is, there can be nothing new—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All things are always new!" Then, like the fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of a steep avalanche, my joy fell steep:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Up in my spirit rose as it were the call</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of an old sorrow from an ancient deep;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, with my eyes fixed on the eyes of him</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom I had loved before I learned to creep—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God's vicar in his twilight nursery dim</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To gather us to the higher father's knee—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I saw a something fill their azure rim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That caught him worlds and years away from me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And like a javelin once more through me passed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The pang that pierced me walking on the sea:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"O saints," I cried, "must loss be still the last?"</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>When I said this, the cloud of witnesses</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turned their heads sideways, and the cloud grew dim</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I saw their faces half, but now their bliss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gleamed low, like the old moon in the new moon's rim.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then as I gazed, a better kind of light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On every outline 'gan to glimmer and swim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faint as the young moon threadlike on the night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Just born of sunbeams trembling on her edge:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">'Twas a great cluster of profiles in sharp white.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had some far dawn begun to drive a wedge</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the night, and cleave the clinging dark?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I saw no moon or star, token or pledge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of light, save that manifold silvery mark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The shining title of each spirit-book.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence came that light? Sudden, as if a spark</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of vital touch had found some hidden nook</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where germs of potent harmonies lay prest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And their outbursting life old Aether shook,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rose, as in prayer to lingering promised guest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From that great cone of faces such a song,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Instinct with hope's harmonical unrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That with sore weeping, and the cry "How long?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I bore my part because I could not sing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And as they sang, the light more clear and strong</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bordered their faces, till the glory-sting</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I could almost no more encounter and bear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Light from their eyes, like water from a spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flowed; on their foreheads reigned their flashing hair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I saw the light from eyes I could not see.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"He comes! he comes!" they sang, "comes to our prayer!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Oh my poor heart, if only it were <i>He!</i>"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I cried. Thereat the faces moved! those eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were turning on me! In rushed ecstasy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And woke me to the light of lower skies.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>"What matter," said I, "whether clank of chain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or over-bliss wakes up to bitterness!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stung with its loss, I called the vision vain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet feeling life grown larger, suffering less,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sleep's ashes from my eyelids I did brush.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The room was veiled, that morning should not press</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the slumber which had stayed the rush</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of ebbing life; I looked into the gloom:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon her brow the dawn's first grayest flush,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on her cheek pale hope's reviving bloom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sat, patient watcher, darkling and alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She who had lifted me from many a tomb!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One then was left me of Love's radiant cone!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Its light on her dear face, though faint and wan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was shining yet—a dawn upon it thrown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the far coming of the Son of Man!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>In every forehead now I see a sky</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Catching the dawn; I hear the wintriest breeze</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About me blow the news the Lord is nigh.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long is the night, dark are the polar seas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet slanting suns ascend the northern hill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Round Spring's own steps the oozy waters freeze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But hold them not. Dreamers are sleeping still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But labourers, light-stung, from their slumber start:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faith sees the ripening ears with harvest fill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When but green blades the clinging earth-clods part.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Lord, I have spoken a poor parable,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which I would have said thy name alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is the one secret lying in Truth's well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy voice the hidden charm in every tone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy face the heart of every flower on earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Its vision the one hope; for every moan</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy love the cure! O sharer of the birth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of little children seated on thy knee!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O human God! I laugh with sacred mirth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To think how all the laden shall go free;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, though the vision tarry, in healing ruth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One morn the eyes that shone in Galilee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will dawn upon them, full of grace and truth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thy own love—the vivifying core</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of every love in heart of age or youth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of every hope that sank 'neath burden sore!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-sangreal" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Sangreal</h2>
<p>    A Part Of The Story Omitted In The Old Romances.</p>

<h5>I.</h5>

<p>    <i>How sir Galahad despaired of finding the Grail.</i></p>

<p>Through the wood the sunny day<br/>

  Glimmered sweetly glad;<br/>

Through the wood his weary way<br/>

  Rode sir Galahad.<br/>
</p>

<p>All about stood open porch,<br/>

  Long-drawn cloister dim;<br/>

'Twas a wavering wandering church<br/>

  Every side of him.<br/>
</p>

<p>On through columns arching high,<br/>

  Foliage-vaulted, he<br/>

Rode in thirst that made him sigh,<br/>

  Longing miserably.<br/>
</p>

<p>Came the moon, and through the trees<br/>

  Glimmered faintly sad;<br/>

Withered, worn, and ill at ease<br/>

  Down lay Galahad;<br/>
</p>

<p>Closed his eyes and took no heed<br/>

  What might come or pass;<br/>

Heard his hunger-busy steed<br/>

  Cropping dewy grass.<br/>
</p>

<p>Cool and juicy was the blade,<br/>

  Good to him as wine:<br/>

For his labour he was paid,<br/>

  Galahad must pine!<br/>
</p>

<p>Late had he at Arthur's board,<br/>

  Arthur strong and wise,<br/>

Pledged the cup with friendly lord,<br/>

  Looked in ladies' eyes;<br/>
</p>

<p>Now, alas! he wandered wide,<br/>

  Resting never more,<br/>

Over lake and mountain-side,<br/>

  Over sea and shore!<br/>
</p>

<p>Swift in vision rose and fled<br/>

  All he might have had;<br/>

Weary tossed his restless head,<br/>

  And his heart grew sad.<br/>
</p>

<p>With the lowliest in the land<br/>

  He a maiden fair<br/>

Might have led with virgin hand<br/>

  From the altar-stair:<br/>
</p>

<p>Youth away with strength would glide,<br/>

  Age bring frost and woe;<br/>

Through the world so dreary wide<br/>

  Mateless he must go!<br/>
</p>

<p>Lost was life and all its good,<br/>

  Gone without avail!<br/>

All his labour never would<br/>

  Find the Holy Grail!<br/>
</p>

<h5>II.</h5>

<p>    <i>How sir Galahad found and lost the Grail.</i></p>

<p>Galahad was in the night,<br/>

  And the wood was drear;<br/>

But to men in darksome plight<br/>

  Radiant things appear:<br/>
</p>

<p>Wings he heard not floating by,<br/>

  Heard no heavenly hail;<br/>

But he started with a cry,<br/>

  For he saw the Grail.<br/>
</p>

<p>Hid from bright beholding sun,<br/>

  Hid from moonlight wan,<br/>

Lo, from age-long darkness won,<br/>

  It was seen of man!<br/>
</p>

<p>Three feet off, on cushioned moss,<br/>

  As if cast away,<br/>

Homely wood with carven cross,<br/>

  Rough and rude it lay!<br/>
</p>

<p>To his knees the knight rose up,<br/>

  Loosed his gauntlet-band;<br/>

Fearing, daring, toward the cup<br/>

  Went his naked hand;<br/>
</p>

<p>When, as if it fled from harm,<br/>

  Sank the holy thing,<br/>

And his eager following arm<br/>

  Plunged into a spring.<br/>
</p>

<p>Oh the thirst, the water sweet!<br/>

  Down he lay and quaffed,<br/>

Quaffed and rose up on his feet,<br/>

  Rose and gayly laughed;<br/>
</p>

<p>Fell upon his knees to thank,<br/>

  Loved and lauded there;<br/>

Stretched him on the mossy bank,<br/>

  Fell asleep in prayer;<br/>
</p>

<p>Dreamed, and dreaming murmured low<br/>

  Ave, pater, creed;<br/>

When the fir-tops gan to glow<br/>

  Waked and called his steed;<br/>
</p>

<p>Bitted him and drew his girth,<br/>

  Watered from his helm:<br/>

Happier knight or better worth<br/>

  Was not in the realm!<br/>
</p>

<p>Belted on him then his sword,<br/>

  Braced his slackened mail;<br/>

Doubting said: "I dreamed the Lord<br/>

  Offered me the Grail."<br/>
</p>

<h5>III.</h5>

<p>    <i>How sir Galahad gave up the Quest for the Grail.</i></p>

<p>Ere the sun had cast his light<br/>

  On the water's face,<br/>

Firm in saddle rode the knight<br/>

  From the holy place,<br/>
</p>

<p>Merry songs began to sing,<br/>

  Let his matins bide;<br/>

Rode a good hour pondering,<br/>

  And was turned aside,<br/>
</p>

<p>Saying, "I will henceforth then<br/>

  Yield this hopeless quest;<br/>

Tis a dream of holy men<br/>

  This ideal Best!"<br/>
</p>

<p>"Every good for miracle<br/>

  Heart devout may hold;<br/>

Grail indeed was that fair well<br/>

  Full of water cold!<br/>
</p>

<p>"Not my thirst alone it stilled<br/>

  But my soul it stayed;<br/>

And my heart, with gladness filled,<br/>

  Wept and laughed and prayed!<br/>
</p>

<p>"Spectral church with cryptic niche<br/>

  I will seek no more;<br/>

That the holiest Grail is, which<br/>

  Helps the need most sore!"<br/>
</p>

<p>And he spake with speech more true<br/>

  Than his thought indeed,<br/>

For not yet the good knight knew<br/>

  His own sorest need.<br/>
</p>

<h5>IV.</h5>

<p>    <i>How sir Galahad sought yet again for the Grail.</i></p>

<p>On he rode, to succour bound,<br/>

  But his faith grew dim;<br/>

Wells for thirst he many found,<br/>

  Water none for him.<br/>
</p>

<p>Never more from drinking deep<br/>

  Rose he up and laughed;<br/>

Never more did prayerful sleep<br/>

  Follow on the draught.<br/>
</p>

<p>Good the water which they bore,<br/>

  Plenteously it flowed,<br/>

Quenched his thirst, but, ah, no more<br/>

  Eased his bosom's load!<br/>
</p>

<p>For the <i>Best</i> no more he sighed;<br/>

  Rode as in a trance;<br/>

Life grew poor, undignified,<br/>

  And he spake of chance.<br/>
</p>

<p>Then he dreamed through Jesus' hand<br/>

  That he drove a nail—<br/>

Woke and cried, "Through every land,<br/>

  Lord, I seek thy Grail!"<br/>
</p>

<h5>V.</h5>

<p>    <i>That sir Galahad found the Grail.</i></p>

<p>Up the quest again he took,<br/>

  Rode through wood and wave;<br/>

Sought in many a mossy nook,<br/>

  Many a hermit-cave;<br/>
</p>

<p>Sought until the evening red<br/>

  Sunk in shadow deep;<br/>

Sought until the moonlight fled;<br/>

  Slept, and sought in sleep.<br/>
</p>

<p>Where he wandered, seeking, sad,<br/>

  Story doth not say,<br/>

But at length sir Galahad<br/>

  Found it on a day;<br/>
</p>

<p>Took the Grail with holy hand,<br/>

  Had the cup of joy;<br/>

Carried it about the land,<br/>

  Gleesome as a boy;<br/>
</p>

<p>Laid his sword where he had found<br/>

  Boot for every bale,<br/>

Stuck his spear into the ground,<br/>

  Kept alone the Grail.<br/>
</p>

<h5>VI.</h5>

<p>    <i>How sir Galahad carried about the Grail.</i></p>

<p>Horse and crested helmet gone,<br/>

  Greaves and shield and mail,<br/>

Caroling loud the knight walked on,<br/>

  For he had the Grail;<br/>
</p>

<p>Caroling loud walked south and north,<br/>

  East and west, for years;<br/>

Where he went, the smiles came forth,<br/>

  Where he left, the tears.<br/>
</p>

<p>Glave nor dagger mourned he,<br/>

  Axe nor iron flail:<br/>

Evil might not brook to see<br/>

  Once the Holy Grail.<br/>
</p>

<p>Wilds he wandered with his staff,<br/>

  Woods no longer sad;<br/>

Earth and sky and sea did laugh<br/>

  Round sir Galahad.<br/>
</p>

<p>Bitter mere nor trodden pool<br/>

  Did in service fail,<br/>

Water all grew sweet and cool<br/>

  In the Holy Grail.<br/>
</p>

<p>Without where to lay his head,<br/>

  Chanting loud he went;<br/>

Found each cave a palace-bed,<br/>

  Every rock a tent.<br/>
</p>

<p>Age that had begun to quail<br/>

  In the gathering gloom,<br/>

Counselled he to seek the Grail<br/>

  And forget the tomb.<br/>
</p>

<p>Youth with hope or passion pale,<br/>

  Youth with eager eyes,<br/>

Taught he that the Holy Grail<br/>

  Was the only prize.<br/>
</p>

<p>Maiden worn with hidden ail,<br/>

  Restless and unsure,<br/>

Taught he that the Holy Grail<br/>

  Was the only cure.<br/>
</p>

<p>Children rosy in the sun<br/>

  Ran to hear his tale<br/>

How twelve little ones had won<br/>

  Each of them the Grail.<br/>
</p>

<h5>VII.</h5>

<p>    <i>How sir Galahad hid the Grail.</i></p>

<p>Very still was earth and sky<br/>

  When he passing lay;<br/>

Oft he said he should not die,<br/>

  Would but go away.<br/>
</p>

<p>When he passed, they reverent sought,<br/>

  Where his hand lay prest,<br/>

For the cup he bare, they thought,<br/>

  Hidden in his breast.<br/>
</p>

<p>Hope and haste and eager thrill<br/>

  Turned to sorrowing wail:<br/>

Hid he held it deeper still,<br/>

  Took with him the Grail.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-failing-track" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Failing Track</h2>
<p>Where went the feet that hitherto have come?<br/>

  Here yawns no gulf to quench the flowing past!<br/>

With lengthening pauses broke, the path grows dumb;<br/>

  The grass floats in; the gazer stands aghast.<br/>
</p>

<p>Tremble not, maiden, though the footprints die;<br/>

  By no air-path ascend the lark's clear notes;<br/>

The mighty-throated when he mounts the sky<br/>

  Over some lowly landmark sings and floats.<br/>
</p>

<p>Be of good cheer. Paths vanish from the wave;<br/>

  There all the ships tear each its track of gray;<br/>

Undaunted they the wandering desert brave:<br/>

  In each a magic finger points the way.<br/>
</p>

<p>No finger finely touched, no eye of lark<br/>

  Hast thou to guide thy steps where footprints fail?<br/>

Ah, then, 'twere well to turn before the dark,<br/>

  Nor dream to find thy dreams in yonder vale!<br/>
</p>

<p>The backward way one hour is plain to thee,<br/>

  Hard hap were hers who saw no trace behind!<br/>

Back to confession at thy mother's knee,<br/>

  Back to the question and the childlike mind!<br/>
</p>

<p>Then start afresh, but toward unending end,<br/>

  The goal o'er which hangs thy own star all night;<br/>

So shalt thou need no footprints to befriend,<br/>

  Child-heart and shining star will guide thee right.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="tell-me" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Tell Me</h2>
<p>"Traveller, what lies over the hill?<br/>

  Traveller, tell to me:<br/>

Tip-toe-high on the window-sill<br/>

  Over I cannot see."<br/>
</p>

<p>"My child, a valley green lies there,<br/>

  Lovely with trees, and shy;<br/>

And a tiny brook that says, 'Take care,<br/>

  Or I'll drown you by and by!'"<br/>
</p>

<p>"And what comes next?"—"A little town,<br/>

  And a towering hill again;<br/>

More hills and valleys up and down,<br/>

  And a river now and then."<br/>
</p>

<p>"And what comes next?"—"A lonely moor<br/>

  Without one beaten way,<br/>

And slow clouds drifting dull before<br/>

  A wind that will not stay."<br/>
</p>

<p>"And then?"—"Dark rocks and yellow sand,<br/>

  Blue sea and a moaning tide."<br/>

"And then?"—"More sea, and then more land,<br/>

  With rivers deep and wide."<br/>
</p>

<p>"And then?"—"Oh, rock and mountain and vale,<br/>

  Ocean and shores and men,<br/>

Over and over, a weary tale,<br/>

  And round to your home again!"<br/>
</p>

<p>"And is that all? From day to day,<br/>

  Like one with a long chain bound,<br/>

Should I walk and walk and not get away,<br/>

  But go always round and round?"<br/>
</p>

<p>"No, no; I have not told you the best,<br/>

  I have not told you the end:<br/>

If you want to escape, away in the west<br/>

  You will see a stair ascend,<br/>
</p>

<p>"Built of all colours of lovely stones,<br/>

  A stair up into the sky<br/>

Where no one is weary, and no one moans,<br/>

  Or wishes to be laid by."<br/>
</p>

<p>"Is it far away?"—"I do not know:<br/>

  You must fix your eyes thereon,<br/>

And travel, travel through thunder and snow,<br/>

  Till the weary way is gone.<br/>
</p>

<p>"All day, though you never see it shine,<br/>

  You must travel nor turn aside,<br/>

All night you must keep as straight a line<br/>

  Through moonbeams or darkness wide."<br/>
</p>

<p>"When I am older!"—"Nay, not so!"<br/>

  "I have hardly opened my eyes!"<br/>

"He who to the old sunset would go,<br/>

  Starts best with the young sunrise."<br/>
</p>

<p>"Is the stair right up? is it very steep?"<br/>

  "Too steep for you to climb;<br/>

You must lie at the foot of the glorious heap<br/>

  And patient wait your time."<br/>
</p>

<p>"How long?"—"Nay, that I cannot tell."<br/>

  "In wind, and rain, and frost?"<br/>

"It may be so; and it is well<br/>

  That you should count the cost.<br/>
</p>

<p>"Pilgrims from near and from distant lands<br/>

  Will step on you lying there;<br/>

But a wayfaring man with wounded hands<br/>

  Will carry you up the stair."<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="brother-artist" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Brother Artist!</h2>
<p>Brother artist, help me; come!<br/>

  Artists are a maimed band:<br/>

  I have words but not a hand;<br/>

Thou hast hands though thou art dumb.<br/>
</p>

<p>Had I thine, when words did fail—<br/>

  Vassal-words their hasting chief,<br/>

  On the white awaiting leaf<br/>

Shapes of power should tell the tale.<br/>
</p>

<p>Had I hers of music-might,<br/>

  I would shake the air with storm<br/>

  Till the red clouds trailed enorm<br/>

Boreal dances through the night.<br/>
</p>

<p>Had I his whose foresight rare<br/>

  Piles the stones with lordliest art,<br/>

  From the quarry of my heart<br/>

Love should climb a heavenly stair!<br/>
</p>

<p>Had I his whose wooing slow<br/>

  Wins the marble's hidden child,<br/>

  Out in passion undefiled<br/>

Stood my Psyche, white as snow!<br/>
</p>

<p>Maimed, a little help I pray;<br/>

  Words suffice not for my end;<br/>

  Let thy hand obey thy friend,<br/>

Say for me what I would say.<br/>
</p>

<p>Draw me, on an arid plain<br/>

  With hoar-headed mountains nigh,<br/>

  Under a clear morning sky<br/>

Telling of a night of rain,<br/>
</p>

<p>Huge and half-shaped, like a block<br/>

  Chosen for sarcophagus<br/>

  By a Pharaoh glorious,<br/>

One rude solitary rock.<br/>
</p>

<p>Cleave it down along the ridge<br/>

  With a fissure yawning deep<br/>

  To the heart of the hard heap,<br/>

Like the rent of riving wedge.<br/>
</p>

<p>Through the cleft let hands appear,<br/>

  Upward pointed with pressed palms<br/>

  As if raised in silent psalms<br/>

For salvation come anear.<br/>
</p>

<p>Turn thee now—'tis almost done!—<br/>

  To the near horizon's verge:<br/>

  Make the smallest arc emerge<br/>

Of the forehead of the sun.<br/>
</p>

<p>One thing more—I ask too much!—<br/>

  From a brow which hope makes brave<br/>

  Sweep the shadow of the grave<br/>

With a single golden touch.<br/>
</p>

<p>Thanks, dear painter; that is all.<br/>

  If thy picture one day should<br/>

  Need some words to make it good,<br/>

I am ready to thy call.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="sir-lark-and-king-sun" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Sir Lark and King Sun</h2>
<p>"Good morrow, my lord!" in the sky alone<br/>

Sang the lark as the sun ascended his throne.<br/>

"Shine on me, my lord: I only am come,<br/>

Of all your servants, to welcome you home!<br/>

I have shot straight up, a whole hour, I swear,<br/>

To catch the first gleam of your golden hair."<br/>
</p>

<p>"Must I thank you then," said the king, "sir Lark,<br/>

For flying so high and hating the dark?<br/>

You ask a full cup for half a thirst:<br/>

Half was love of me, half love to be first.<br/>

Some of my subjects serve better my taste:<br/>

Their watching and waiting means more than your haste."<br/>
</p>

<p>King Sun wrapt his head in a turban of cloud;<br/>

Sir Lark stopped singing, quite vexed and cowed;<br/>

But higher he flew, for he thought, "Anon<br/>

The wrath of the king will be over and gone;<br/>

And, scattering his head-gear manifold,<br/>

He will change my brown feathers to a glory of gold!"<br/>
</p>

<p>He flew, with the strength of a lark he flew,<br/>

But as he rose the cloud rose too;<br/>

And not one gleam of the flashing hair<br/>

Brought signal of favour across the air;<br/>

And his wings felt withered and worn and old,<br/>

For their feathers had had no chrism of gold.<br/>
</p>

<p>Outwearied at length, and throbbing sore,<br/>

The strong sun-seeker could do no more;<br/>

He faltered and sank, then dropped like a stone<br/>

Beside his nest, where, patient, alone,<br/>

Sat his little wife on her little eggs,<br/>

Keeping them warm with wings and legs.<br/>
</p>

<p>Did I say alone? Ah, no such thing!<br/>

There was the cloudless, the ray-crowned king!<br/>

"Welcome, sir Lark!—You look tired!" said he;<br/>

"<i>Up</i> is not always the best way to me:<br/>

While you have been racing my turban gray,<br/>

I have been shining where you would not stay!"<br/>
</p>

<p>He had set a coronet round the nest;<br/>

Its radiance foamed on the wife's little breast;<br/>

And so glorious was she in russet gold<br/>

That sir Lark for wonder and awe grew cold;<br/>

He popped his head under her wing, and lay<br/>

As still as a stone till king Sun went away.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-owl-and-the-bell" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Owl and the Bell</h2>
<p><i>Bing, Bim, Bang, Bome!</i><br/>

Sang the Bell to himself in his house at home,<br/>

High in the church-tower, lone and unseen,<br/>

In a twilight of ivy, cool and green;<br/>

With his <i>Bing, Bing, Bim, Bing, Bang, Bome!</i><br/>

Singing bass to himself in his house at home.<br/>
</p>

<p>Said the Owl, on a shadowy ledge below,<br/>

Like a glimmering ball of forgotten snow,<br/>

"Pest on that fellow sitting up there,<br/>

Always calling the people to prayer!<br/>

He shatters my nerves with his <i>Bing, Bang, Bome!</i>—-<br/>

Far too big in his house at home!<br/>
</p>

<p>"I think I will move.—But it suits me well,<br/>

And one may get used to it, who can tell!"<br/>

So he slept again with all his might,<br/>

Then woke and snooved out in the hush of night<br/>

When the Bell was asleep in his house at home,<br/>

Dreaming over his <i>Bing, Bang, Bome!</i><br/>
</p>

<p>For the Owl was born so poor and genteel<br/>

What could he do but pick and steal?<br/>

He scorned to work for honest bread—<br/>

"Better have never been hatched!" he said.<br/>

So his day was the night, for he dared not roam<br/>

Till sleep had silenced the <i>Bing, Bang, Bome!</i><br/>
</p>

<p>When five greedy Owlets chipped the egg<br/>

He wanted two beaks and another leg,<br/>

And they ate the more that they did not sleep well:<br/>

"It's their gizzards," said Owless; said Owl, "It's that Bell!"<br/>

For they quivered like leaves of a wind-blown tome<br/>

When the Bell bellowed out his <i>Bing, Bang, Bome!</i><br/>
</p>

<p>But the Bell began to throb with the fear<br/>

Of bringing his house about his one ear;<br/>

And his people came round it, quite a throng,<br/>

To buttress the walls and make them strong:<br/>

A full month he sat, and felt like a mome<br/>

Not daring to shout his <i>Bing, Bang, Bome!</i><br/>
</p>

<p>Said the Owl to himself, and hissed as he said,<br/>

"I trust in my heart the old fool is dead!<br/>

No more will he scare church-mice with his bounce,<br/>

And make them so thin they're scarce worth a pounce!<br/>

Once I will see him ere he's laid in the loam,<br/>

And shout in his ear <i>Bing, Bim, Bang, Bome!</i>"<br/>
</p>

<p>"Hoo! hoo!" he cried, as he entered the steeple,<br/>

"They've hanged him at last, the righteous people!<br/>

His swollen tongue lolls out of his head!<br/>

Hoo! hoo! at last the old brute is dead!<br/>

There let him hang, the shapeless gnome,<br/>

Choked with a throatful of <i>Bing, Bang, Bome!</i>"<br/>
</p>

<p>He fluttered about him, singing <i>Too-whoo!</i><br/>

He flapped the poor Bell, and said, "Is that you?<br/>

You that never would matters mince,<br/>

Banging poor owls and making them wince?<br/>

A fig for you now, in your great hall-dome!<br/>

<i>Too-whit</i> is better than <i>Bing, Bang, Bome!</i>"<br/>
</p>

<p>Still braver he grew, the downy, the dapper;<br/>

He flew in and perched on the knob of the clapper,<br/>

And shouted <i>Too-whoo!</i> An echo awoke<br/>

Like a far-off ghostly <i>Bing-Bang</i> stroke:<br/>

"Just so!" he cried; "I am quite at home!<br/>

I will take his place with my <i>Bing, Bang, Bome!</i>"<br/>
</p>

<p>He hissed with the scorn of his grand self-wonder,<br/>

And thought the Bell's tremble his own great thunder:<br/>

He sat the Jove of creation's fowl.—<br/>

<i>Bang!</i> went the Bell—through the rope-hole the owl,<br/>

A fluffy avalanche, light as foam,<br/>

Loosed by the boom of the <i>Bing, Bang, Bome!</i><br/>
</p>

<p>He sat where he fell, as if he had meant it,<br/>

Ready for any remark anent it.<br/>

Said the eldest Owlet, "Pa, you were wrong;<br/>

He's at it again with his vulgar song!"<br/>

"Child," said the Owl, "of the mark you are wide:<br/>

I brought him to life by perching inside."<br/>
</p>

<p>"Why did you, my dear?" said his startled wife;<br/>

"He has always been the plague of your life!"<br/>

"I have given him a lesson of good for evil:<br/>

Perhaps the old ruffian will now be civil!"<br/>

The Owl sat righteous, he raised his comb.<br/>

The Bell bawled on, <i>Bing, Bim, Bang, Bome!</i><br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="he-heeded-not" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">He Heeded Not</h2>
<p>  Of whispering trees the tongues to hear,<br/>

    And sermons of the silent stone;<br/>

  To read in brooks the print so clear<br/>

    Of motion, shadowy light, and tone—<br/>

  That man hath neither eye nor ear<br/>

    Who careth not for human moan.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Yea, he who draws, in shrinking haste,<br/>

    From sin that passeth helpless by;<br/>

  The weak antennae of whose taste<br/>

    From touch of alien grossness fly—<br/>

  Shall, banished to the outer waste,<br/>

    Never in Nature's bosom lie.<br/>
</p>

<p>  But he whose heart is full of grace<br/>

    To his own kindred all about,<br/>

  Shall find in lowest human face,<br/>

    Blasted with wrong and dull with doubt,<br/>

  More than in Nature's holiest place<br/>

    Where mountains dwell and streams run out.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Coarse cries of strife assailed my ear,<br/>

    In suburb-ways, one summer morn;<br/>

  A wretched alley I drew near<br/>

    Whence on the air the sounds were borne—<br/>

  Growls breaking into curses clear,<br/>

    And shrill retorts of keener scorn.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Slow from its narrow entrance came,<br/>

    His senses drowned with revels dire,<br/>

  Scarce fit to answer to his name,<br/>

    A man unconscious save of ire;<br/>

  Fierce flashes of dull, fitful flame<br/>

    Broke from the embers of his fire.<br/>
</p>

<p>  He cast a glance of stupid hate<br/>

    Behind him, every step he took,<br/>

  Where followed him, like following fate,<br/>

    An aged crone, with bloated look:<br/>

  A something checked his listless gait;<br/>

    She neared him, rating till she shook.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Why stood he still to be disgraced?<br/>

    What hindered? Lost in his employ,<br/>

  His eager head high as his waist,<br/>

    Half-buttressed him a tiny boy,<br/>

  An earnest child, ill-clothed, pale-faced,<br/>

    Whose eyes held neither hope nor joy.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Perhaps you think he pushed, and pled<br/>

    For one poor coin to keep the peace<br/>

  With hunger! or home would have led<br/>

    And given him up to sleep's release:<br/>

  Well he might know the good of bed<br/>

    To make the drunken fever cease!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Not so; like unfledged, hungry bird<br/>

    He stood on tiptoe, reaching higher,<br/>

  But no expostulating word<br/>

    Did in his anxious soul aspire;<br/>

  With humbler care his heart was stirred,<br/>

    With humbler service to his sire.<br/>
</p>

<p>  He, sleepless-pale and wrathful red,<br/>

    Though forward leaning, held his foot<br/>

  Lest on the darling he should tread:<br/>

    A misty sense had taken root<br/>

  Somewhere in his bewildered head<br/>

    That round him kindness hovered mute.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The words his simmering rage did spill<br/>

    Passed o'er the child like breeze o'er corn;<br/>

  Safer than bee whose dodging skill<br/>

    And myriad eyes the hail-shower scorn,<br/>

  The boy, absorbed in loving will,<br/>

    Buttoned his father's waistcoat worn.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Over his calm, unconscious face<br/>

    No motion passed, no change of mood;<br/>

  Still as a pool in its own place,<br/>

    Unsunned within a thick-leaved wood,<br/>

  It kept its quiet shadowy grace,<br/>

    As round it all things had been good.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Was the boy deaf—the tender palm<br/>

    Of him that made him folded round<br/>

  The little head to keep it calm<br/>

    With a <i>hitherto</i> to every sound—<br/>

  And so nor curse nor shout nor psalm<br/>

    Could thrill the globe thus grandly bound?<br/>
</p>

<p>  Or came in force the happy law<br/>

    That customed things themselves erase?<br/>

  Or was he too intent for awe?<br/>

    Did love take all the thinking place?<br/>

  I cannot tell; I only saw<br/>

    An earnest, fearless, hopeless face.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-sheep-and-the-goat" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Sheep and the Goat</h2>
<p>  The thousand streets of London gray<br/>

    Repel all country sights;<br/>

  But bar not winds upon their way,<br/>

  Nor quench the scent of new-mown hay<br/>

    In depth of summer nights.<br/>
</p>

<p>  And here and there an open spot,<br/>

    Still bare to light and dark,<br/>

  With grass receives the wanderer hot;<br/>

  There trees are growing, houses not—<br/>

    They call the place a park.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Soft creatures, with ungentle guides,<br/>

    God's sheep from hill and plain,<br/>

  Flow thitherward in fitful tides,<br/>

  There weary lie on woolly sides,<br/>

    Or crop the grass amain.<br/>
</p>

<p>  And from dark alley, yard, and den,<br/>

    In ragged skirts and coats,<br/>

  Come thither children of poor men,<br/>

  Wild things, untaught of word or pen—<br/>

    The little human goats.<br/>
</p>

<p>  In Regent's Park, one cloudless day,<br/>

    An overdriven sheep,<br/>

  Come a hard, long, and dusty way,<br/>

  Throbbing with thirst and hotness lay,<br/>

    A panting woollen heap.<br/>
</p>

<p>  But help is nearer than we know<br/>

    For ills of every name:<br/>

  Ragged enough to scare the crow,<br/>

  But with a heart to pity woe,<br/>

    A quick-eyed urchin came.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Little he knew of field or fold,<br/>

    Yet knew what ailed; his cap<br/>

  Was ready cup for water cold;<br/>

  Though creased, and stained, and very old,<br/>

    'Twas not much torn, good hap!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Shaping the rim and crown he went,<br/>

    Till crown from rim was deep;<br/>

  The water gushed from pore and rent,<br/>

  Before he came one half was spent—<br/>

    The other saved the sheep.<br/>
</p>

<p>  O little goat, born, bred in ill,<br/>

    Unwashed, half-fed, unshorn,<br/>

  Thou to the sheep from breezy hill<br/>

  Wast bishop, pastor, what you will,<br/>

    In London dry and lorn!<br/>
</p>

<p>  And let priests say the thing they please,<br/>

    My faith, though poor and dim,<br/>

  Thinks he will say who always sees,<br/>

  In doing it to one of these<br/>

    Thou didst it unto him.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-shadows" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Shadows</h2>
<p>  My little boy, with smooth, fair cheeks,<br/>

    And dreamy, large, brown eyes,<br/>

  Not often, little wisehead, speaks,<br/>

    But hearing, weighs and tries.<br/>
</p>

<p>  "God is not only in the sky,"<br/>

    His sister said one day—<br/>

  Not older much, but she would cry<br/>

    Like Wisdom in the way—<br/>
</p>

<p>  "He's in this room." His dreamy, clear,<br/>

    Large eyes look round for God:<br/>

  In vain they search, in vain they peer;<br/>

    His wits are all abroad!<br/>
</p>

<p>  "He is not here, mamma? No, no;<br/>

    I do not see him at all!<br/>

  He's not the shadows, is he?" So<br/>

    His doubtful accents fall—<br/>
</p>

<p>  Fall on my heart, no babble mere!<br/>

    They rouse both love and shame:<br/>

  But for earth's loneliness and fear,<br/>

    I might be saying the same!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Nay, sometimes, ere the morning break<br/>

    And home the shadows flee,<br/>

  In my dim room even yet I take<br/>

    Those shadows, Lord, for thee!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="an-old-sermon-with-a-new-text" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">An Old Sermon with a New Text</h2>
<p>  My wife contrived a fleecy thing<br/>

    Her husband to infold,<br/>

  For 'tis the pride of woman still<br/>

    To cover from the cold:<br/>

  My daughter made it a new text<br/>

    For a sermon very old.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The child came trotting to her side,<br/>

    Ready with bootless aid:<br/>

  "Lily make veckit for papa,"<br/>

    The tiny woman said:<br/>

  Her mother gave the means and ways,<br/>

    And a knot upon her thread.<br/>
</p>

<p>  "Mamma, mamma!—it won't come through!"<br/>

    In meek dismay she cried.<br/>

  Her mother cut away the knot,<br/>

    And she was satisfied,<br/>

  Pulling the long thread through and through,<br/>

    In fabricating pride.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Her mother told me this: I caught<br/>

    A glimpse of something more:<br/>

  Great meanings often hide behind<br/>

    The little word before!<br/>

  And I brooded over my new text<br/>

    Till the seed a sermon bore.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Nannie, to you I preach it now—<br/>

    A little sermon, low:<br/>

  Is it not thus a thousand times,<br/>

    As through the world we go?<br/>

  Do we not tug, and fret, and cry—<br/>

    Instead of <i>Yes, Lord—No</i>?<br/>
</p>

<p>  While all the rough things that we meet<br/>

    Which will not move a jot,<br/>

  The hindrances to heart and feet,<br/>

    <i>The Crook in every Lot</i>,<br/>

  Mean plainly but that children's threads<br/>

    Have at the end a knot.<br/>
</p>

<p>  This world of life God weaves for us,<br/>

    Nor spares he pains or cost,<br/>

  But we must turn the web to clothes<br/>

    And shield our hearts from frost:<br/>

  Shall we, because the thread holds fast,<br/>

    Count labour vain and lost?<br/>
</p>

<p>  If he should cut away the knot,<br/>

    And yield each fancy wild,<br/>

  The hidden life within our hearts—<br/>

    His life, the undefiled—<br/>

  Would fare as ill as I should fare<br/>

    From the needle of my child.<br/>
</p>

<p>  As tack and sheet unto the sail,<br/>

    As to my verse the rime,<br/>
</p>

<p>  As mountains to the low green earth—<br/>

    So hard for feet to climb,<br/>

  As call of striking clock amid<br/>

    The quiet flow of time,<br/>
</p>

<p>  As sculptor's mallet to the birth<br/>

    Of the slow-dawning face,<br/>

  As knot upon my Lily's thread<br/>

    When she would work apace,<br/>

  God's <i>Nay</i> is such, and worketh so<br/>

    For his children's coming grace.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Who, knowing God's intent with him,<br/>

    His birthright would refuse?<br/>

  What makes us what we have to be<br/>

    Is the only thing to choose:<br/>

  We understand nor end nor means,<br/>

    And yet his ways accuse!<br/>
</p>

<p>  This is my sermon. It is preached<br/>

    Against all fretful strife.<br/>

  Chafe not with anything that is,<br/>

    Nor cut it with thy knife.<br/>

  Ah! be not angry with the knot<br/>

    That holdeth fast thy life.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-wakeful-sleeper" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Wakeful Sleeper</h2>
<p>  When things are holding wonted pace<br/>

  In wonted paths, without a trace<br/>

    Or hint of neighbouring wonder,<br/>

  Sometimes, from other realms, a tone,<br/>

  A scent, a vision, swift, alone,<br/>

    Breaks common life asunder.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Howe'er it comes, whate'er its door,<br/>

  It makes you ponder something more—<br/>

    Unseen with seen things linking:<br/>

  To neighbours met one festive night,<br/>

  Was given a quaint and lovely sight,<br/>

    That set some of them thinking.<br/>
</p>

<p>  They stand, in music's fetters bound<br/>

  By a clear brook of warbled sound,<br/>

    A canzonet of Haydn,<br/>

  When the door slowly comes ajar—<br/>

  A little further—just as far<br/>

    As shows a tiny maiden.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Softly she enters, her pink toes<br/>

  Daintily peeping, as she goes,<br/>

    Her long nightgown from under.<br/>

  The varied mien, the questioning look<br/>

  Were worth a picture; but she took<br/>

    No notice of their wonder.<br/>
</p>

<p>  They made a path, and she went through;<br/>

  She had her little chair in view<br/>

    Close by the chimney-corner;<br/>

  She turned, sat down before them all,<br/>

  Stately as princess at a ball,<br/>

    And silent as a mourner.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Then looking closer yet, they spy<br/>

  What mazedness hid from every eye<br/>

    As ghost-like she came creeping:<br/>

  They see that though sweet little Rose<br/>

  Her settled way unerring goes,<br/>

    Plainly the child is sleeping.<br/>
</p>

<p>  "Play on, sing on," the mother said;<br/>

  "Oft music draws her from her bed."—<br/>

    Dumb Echo, she sat listening;<br/>

  Over her face the sweet concent<br/>

  Like winds o'er placid waters went,<br/>

    Her cheeks like eyes were glistening.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Her hands tight-clasped her bent knees hold<br/>

  Like long grass drooping on the wold<br/>

    Her sightless head is bending;<br/>

  She sits all ears, and drinks her fill,<br/>

  Then rising goes, sedate and still,<br/>

    On silent white feet wending.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Surely, while she was listening so,<br/>

  Glad thoughts in her went to and fro<br/>

    Preparing her 'gainst sorrow,<br/>

  And ripening faith for that sure day<br/>

  When earnest first looks out of play,<br/>

    And thought out of to-morrow.<br/>
</p>

<p>  She will not know from what fair skies<br/>

  Troop hopes to front anxieties—<br/>

    In what far fields they gather,<br/>

  Until she knows that even in sleep,<br/>

  Yea, in the dark of trouble deep,<br/>

    The child is with the Father.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-dream-of-waking" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Dream of Waking</h2>
<p>  A child was born in sin and shame,<br/>

    Wronged by his very birth,<br/>

  Without a home, without a name,<br/>

    One over in the earth.<br/>
</p>

<p>  No wifely triumph he inspired,<br/>

    Allayed no husband's fear;<br/>

  Intruder bare, whom none desired,<br/>

    He had a welcome drear.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Heaven's beggar, all but turned adrift<br/>

    For knocking at earth's gate,<br/>

  His mother, like an evil gift,<br/>

    Shunned him with sickly hate.<br/>
</p>

<p>  And now the mistress on her knee<br/>

    The unloved baby bore,<br/>

  The while the servant sullenly<br/>

    Prepared to leave her door.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Her eggs are dear to mother-dove,<br/>

    Her chickens to the hen;<br/>

  All young ones bring with them their love,<br/>

    Of sheep, or goats, or men!<br/>
</p>

<p>  This one lone child shall not have come<br/>

    In vain for love to seek:<br/>

  Let mother's hardened heart be dumb,<br/>

    A sister-babe will speak!<br/>
</p>

<p>  "Mother, keep baby—keep him <i>so</i>;<br/>

    Don't let him go away."<br/>

  "But, darling, if his mother go,<br/>

    Poor baby cannot stay."<br/>
</p>

<p>  "He's crying, mother: don't you see<br/>

    He wants to stay with you?"<br/>

  "No, child; he does not care for me."<br/>

    "Do keep him, mother—<i>do</i>."<br/>
</p>

<p>  "For his own mother he would cry;<br/>

    He's hungry now, I think."<br/>

  "Give him to me, and let <i>me</i> try<br/>

    If I can make him drink."<br/>
</p>

<p>  "Susan would hurt him! Mother <i>will</i><br/>

    Let the poor baby stay?"<br/>

  Her mother's heart grew sore, but still<br/>

    Baby must go away!<br/>
</p>

<p>  The red lip trembled; the slow tears<br/>

    Came darkening in her eyes;<br/>

  Pressed on her heart a weight of fears<br/>

    That sought not ease in cries.<br/>
</p>

<p>  'Twas torture—must not be endured!—<br/>

    A too outrageous grief!<br/>

  Was there an ill could <i>not</i> be cured?<br/>

    She <i>would</i> find some relief!<br/>
</p>

<p>  All round her universe she pried:<br/>

    No dawn began to break:<br/>

  In prophet-agony she cried—<br/>

    "Mother! when <i>shall</i> we wake?"<br/>
</p>

<p>  O insight born of torture's might!—<br/>

    Such grief <i>can</i> only seem.<br/>

  Rise o'er the hills, eternal light,<br/>

    And melt the earthly dream.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-meditation-of-st-eligius" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Meditation of St Eligius</h2>
<p>_Queen Mary one day Jesus sent<br/>

  To fetch some water, legends tell;<br/>

The little boy, obedient,<br/>

  Drew a full pitcher from the well;<br/>
</p>

<p>But as he raised it to his head,<br/>

  The water lipping with the rim,<br/>

The handle broke, and all was shed<br/>

  Upon the stones about the brim.<br/>
</p>

<p>His cloak upon the ground he laid<br/>

  And in it gathered up the pool; [Proverbs xxx. 4.]<br/>

Obedient there the water staid,<br/>

  And home he bore it plentiful._<br/>
</p>

<p>Eligius said, "Tis fabled ill:<br/>

  The hands that all the world control,<br/>

Had here been room for miracle,<br/>

  Had made his mother's pitcher whole!<br/>
</p>

<p>"Still, some few drops for thirsty need<br/>

  A poor invention even, when told<br/>

In love of thee the Truth indeed,<br/>

  Like broken pitcher yet may hold:<br/>
</p>

<p>"Thy truth, alas, Lord, once I spilt:<br/>

  I thought to bear the pitcher high;<br/>

Upon the shining stones of guilt<br/>

  I slipped, and there the potsherds lie!<br/>
</p>

<p><i>"Master,</i> I cried, _no man will drink,<br/>

  No human thirst will e'er be stilled<br/>

Through me, who sit upon the brink,<br/>

  My pitcher broke, thy water spilled!<br/>
</p>

<p>"What will they do I waiting left?<br/>

  They looked to me to bring thy law!<br/>

The well is deep, and, sin-bereft,<br/>

  I nothing have wherewith to draw!"_<br/>
</p>

<p>"But as I sat in evil plight,<br/>

  With dry parched heart and sickened brain,<br/>

Uprose in me the water bright,<br/>

  Thou gavest me thyself again!"<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="hymn-for-a-sick-girl" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Hymn for a Sick Girl</h2>
<p>  Father, in the dark I lay,<br/>

      Thirsting for the light,<br/>

  Helpless, but for hope alway<br/>

      In thy father-might.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Out of darkness came the morn,<br/>

      Out of death came life,<br/>

  I, and faith, and hope, new-born,<br/>

      Out of moaning strife!<br/>
</p>

<p>  So, one morning yet more fair,<br/>

      I shall, joyous-brave,<br/>

  Sudden breathing loftier air,<br/>

      Triumph o'er the grave.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Though this feeble body lie<br/>

      Underneath the ground,<br/>

  Wide awake, not sleeping, I<br/>

      Shall in him be found.<br/>
</p>

<p>  But a morn yet fairer must<br/>

      Quell this inner gloom—<br/>

  Resurrection from the dust<br/>

      Of a deeper tomb!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Father, wake thy little child;<br/>

      Give me bread and wine<br/>

  Till my spirit undefiled<br/>

      Rise and live in thine.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-christmas-carol-for-1862" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Christmas Carol for 1862</h2>
<h5>      THE YEAR OF THE TROUBLE IN LANCASHIRE.</h5>

<p>  The skies are pale, the trees are stiff,<br/>

      The earth is dull and old;<br/>

  The frost is glittering as if<br/>

      The very sun were cold.<br/>

  And hunger fell is joined with frost,<br/>

      To make men thin and wan:<br/>

  Come, babe, from heaven, or we are lost;<br/>

      Be born, O child of man.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The children cry, the women shake,<br/>

      The strong men stare about;<br/>

  They sleep when they should be awake,<br/>

      They wake ere night is out.<br/>

  For they have lost their heritage—<br/>

      No sweat is on their brow:<br/>

  Come, babe, and bring them work and wage;<br/>

      Be born, and save us now.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Across the sea, beyond our sight,<br/>

      Roars on the fierce debate;<br/>

  The men go down in bloody fight,<br/>

      The women weep and hate;<br/>

  And in the right be which that may,<br/>

      Surely the strife is long!<br/>

  Come, son of man, thy righteous way,<br/>

      And right will have no wrong.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Good men speak lies against thine own—<br/>

      Tongue quick, and hearing slow;<br/>

  They will not let thee walk alone,<br/>

      And think to serve thee so:<br/>

  If they the children's freedom saw<br/>

      In thee, the children's king,<br/>

  They would be still with holy awe,<br/>

      Or only speak to sing.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Some neither lie nor starve nor fight,<br/>

      Nor yet the poor deny;<br/>

  But in their hearts all is not right,—<br/>

      They often sit and sigh.<br/>

  We need thee every day and hour,<br/>

      In sunshine and in snow:<br/>

  Child-king, we pray with all our power—<br/>

      Be born, and save us so.<br/>
</p>

<p>  We are but men and women, Lord;<br/>

      Thou art a gracious child!<br/>

  O fill our hearts, and heap our board,<br/>

      Pray thee—the winter's wild!<br/>

  The sky is sad, the trees are bare,<br/>

      Hunger and hate about:<br/>

  Come, child, and ill deeds and ill fare<br/>

      Will soon be driven out.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-christmas-carol" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Christmas Carol</h2>
<p>  Babe Jesus lay in Mary's lap,<br/>

      The sun shone in his hair;<br/>

  And this was how she saw, mayhap,<br/>

      The crown already there.<br/>
</p>

<p>  For she sang: "Sleep on, my little king;<br/>

      Bad Herod dares not come;<br/>

  Before thee sleeping, holy thing,<br/>

      The wild winds would be dumb."<br/>
</p>

<p>  "I kiss thy hands, I kiss thy feet,<br/>

      My child, so long desired;<br/>

  Thy hands will never be soiled, my sweet;<br/>

      Thy feet will never be tired."<br/>
</p>

<p>  "For thou art the king of men, my son;<br/>

      Thy crown I see it plain!<br/>

  And men shall worship thee, every one,<br/>

      And cry, Glory! Amen!"<br/>
</p>

<p>  Babe Jesus he opened his eyes wide—<br/>

      At Mary looked her lord.<br/>

  Mother Mary stinted her song and sighed;<br/>

      Babe Jesus said never a word.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-sleepless-jesus" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Sleepless Jesus</h2>
<p>  'Tis time to sleep, my little boy:<br/>

      Why gaze thy bright eyes so?<br/>

  At night our children, for new joy<br/>

      Home to thy father go,<br/>

  But thou art wakeful! Sleep, my child;<br/>

      The moon and stars are gone;<br/>

  The wind is up and raving wild,<br/>

      But thou art smiling on!<br/>
</p>

<p>  My child, thou hast immortal eyes<br/>

      That see by their own light;<br/>

  They see the children's blood—it lies<br/>

      Red-glowing through the night!<br/>

  Thou hast an ever-open ear<br/>

      For sob or cry or moan:<br/>

  Thou seemest not to see or hear,<br/>

      Thou only smilest on!<br/>
</p>

<p>  When first thou camest to the earth,<br/>

      All sounds of strife were still;<br/>

  A silence lay about thy birth,<br/>

      And thou didst sleep thy fill:<br/>

  Thou wakest now—why weep'st thou not?<br/>

      Thy earth is woe-begone;<br/>

  Both babes and mothers wail their lot,<br/>

      But still thou smilest on!<br/>
</p>

<p>  I read thy face like holy book;<br/>

      No hurt is pictured there;<br/>

  Deep in thine eyes I see the look<br/>

      Of one who answers prayer.<br/>

  Beyond pale grief and wild uproars,<br/>

      Thou seest God's will well done;<br/>

  Low prayers, through chambers' closed doors,<br/>

      Thou hear'st—and smilest on.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Men say: "I will arise and go;"<br/>

      God says: "I will go meet:"<br/>

  Thou seest them gather, weeping low,<br/>

      About the Father's feet;<br/>

  And each for each begin to bear,<br/>

      And standing lonely none:<br/>

  Answered, O eyes, ye see all prayer!<br/>

      Smile, Son of God, smile on.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-childrens-heaven" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Children's Heaven</h2>
<p>  The infant lies in blessed ease<br/>

      Upon his mother's breast;<br/>

  No storm, no dark, the baby sees<br/>

      Invade his heaven of rest.<br/>

  He nothing knows of change or death—<br/>

      Her face his holy skies;<br/>

  The air he breathes, his mother's breath;<br/>

      His stars, his mother's eyes!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Yet half the soft winds wandering there<br/>

      Are sighs that come of fears;<br/>

  The dew slow falling through that air—<br/>

      It is the dew of tears;<br/>

  And ah, my child, thy heavenly home<br/>

      Hath storms as well as dew;<br/>

  Black clouds fill sometimes all its dome,<br/>

      And quench the starry blue!<br/>
</p>

<p>  "My smile would win no smile again,<br/>

      If baby saw the things<br/>

  That ache across his mother's brain<br/>

      The while to him she sings!<br/>

  Thy faith in me is faith in vain—<br/>

      I am not what I seem:<br/>

  O dreary day, O cruel pain,<br/>

      That wakes thee from thy dream!"<br/>
</p>

<p>  Nay, pity not his dreams so fair,<br/>

      Fear thou no waking grief;<br/>

  Oh, safer he than though thou were<br/>

      Good as his vague belief!<br/>

  There is a heaven that heaven above<br/>

      Whereon he gazes now;<br/>

  A truer love than in thy kiss;<br/>

      A better friend than thou!<br/>
</p>

<p>  The Father's arms fold like a nest<br/>

      Both thee and him about;<br/>

  His face looks down, a heaven of rest,<br/>

      Where comes no dark, no doubt.<br/>

  Its mists are clouds of stars that move<br/>

      On, on, with progress rife;<br/>

  Its winds, the goings of his love;<br/>

      Its dew, the dew of life.<br/>
</p>

<p>  We for our children seek thy heart,<br/>

      For them we lift our eyes:<br/>

  Lord, should their faith in us depart,<br/>

      Let faith in thee arise.<br/>

  When childhood's visions them forsake,<br/>

      To women grown and men,<br/>

  Back to thy heart their hearts oh take,<br/>

      And bid them dream again.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="rejoice" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Rejoice</h2>
<p>  "Rejoice," said the Sun; "I will make thee gay<br/>

  With glory and gladness and holiday;<br/>

  I am dumb, O man, and I need thy voice!"<br/>

  But man would not rejoice.<br/>
</p>

<p>  "Rejoice in thyself," said he, "O Sun,<br/>

  For thy daily course is a lordly one;<br/>

  In thy lofty place rejoice if thou can:<br/>

  For me, I am only a man."<br/>
</p>

<p>  "Rejoice," said the Wind; "I am free and strong,<br/>

  And will wake in thy heart an ancient song;<br/>

  Hear the roaring woods, my organ noise!"<br/>

  But man would not rejoice.<br/>
</p>

<p>  "Rejoice, O Wind, in thy strength," said he,<br/>

  "For thou fulfillest thy destiny;<br/>

  Shake the forest, the faint flowers fan;<br/>

  For me, I am only a man."<br/>
</p>

<p>  "Rejoice," said the Night, "with moon and star,<br/>

  For the Sun and the Wind are gone afar;<br/>

  I am here with rest and dreaming choice!"<br/>

  But man would not rejoice;<br/>
</p>

<p>  For he said—"What is rest to me, I pray,<br/>

  Whose labour leads to no gladsome day?<br/>

  He only can dream who has hope behind:<br/>

  Alas for me and my kind!"<br/>
</p>

<p>  Then a voice that came not from moon or star,<br/>

  From the sun, or the wind that roved afar,<br/>

  Said, "Man, I am with thee—hear my voice!"<br/>

  And man said, "I rejoice."<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-grace-of-grace" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Grace of Grace</h2>
<p>  Had I the grace to win the grace<br/>

      Of some old man in lore complete,<br/>

  My face would worship at his face,<br/>

      And I sit lowly at his feet.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Had I the grace to win the grace<br/>

      Of childhood, loving shy, apart,<br/>

  The child should find a nearer place,<br/>

      And teach me resting on my heart.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Had I the grace to win the grace<br/>

      Of maiden living all above,<br/>

  My soul would trample down the base,<br/>

      That she might have a man to love.<br/>
</p>

<p>  A grace I had no grace to win<br/>

      Knocks now at my half open door:<br/>

  Ah, Lord of glory, come thou in!—<br/>

      Thy grace divine is all, and more.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="antiphon" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Antiphon</h2>
<p>  Daylight fades away.<br/>

      Is the Lord at hand<br/>

  In the shadows gray<br/>

      Stealing on the land?<br/>
</p>

<p>        Gently from the east<br/>

          Come the shadows gray;<br/>

        But our lowly priest<br/>

          Nearer is than they.<br/>
</p>

<p>  It is darkness quite.<br/>

      Is the Lord at hand,<br/>

  In the cloak of night<br/>

      Stolen upon the land?<br/>
</p>

<p>        But I see no night,<br/>

          For my Lord is here<br/>

        With him dark is light,<br/>

          With him far is near.<br/>
</p>

<p>  List! the cock's awake.<br/>

      Is the Lord at hand?<br/>

  Cometh he to make<br/>

      Light in all the land?<br/>
</p>

<p>        Long ago he made<br/>

          Morning in my heart;<br/>

        Long ago he bade<br/>

          Shadowy things depart.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Lo, the dawning hill!<br/>

      Is the Lord at hand,<br/>

  Come to scatter ill,<br/>

      Ruling in the land?<br/>
</p>

<p>        He hath scattered ill,<br/>

          Ruling in my mind;<br/>

        Growing to his will,<br/>

          Freedom comes, I find.<br/>
</p>

<p>  We will watch all day,<br/>

      Lest the Lord should come;<br/>

  All night waking stay<br/>

      In the darkness dumb.<br/>
</p>

<p>        I will work all day,<br/>

          For the Lord hath come;<br/>

        Down my head will lay<br/>

          All night, glad and dumb.<br/>
</p>

<p>  For we know not when<br/>

      Christ may be at hand;<br/>

  But we know that then<br/>

      Joy is in the land.<br/>
</p>

<p>        For I know that where<br/>

          Christ hath come again,<br/>

        Quietness without care<br/>

          Dwelleth in his men.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="dorcas" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Dorcas</h2>
<p>  If I might guess, then guess I would<br/>

      That, mid the gathered folk,<br/>

  This gentle Dorcas one day stood,<br/>

      And heard when Jesus spoke.<br/>
</p>

<p>  She saw the woven seamless coat—<br/>

      Half envious, for his sake:<br/>

  "Oh, happy hands," she said, "that wrought<br/>

      The honoured thing to make!"<br/>
</p>

<p>  Her eyes with longing tears grow dim:<br/>

      She never can come nigh<br/>

  To work one service poor for him<br/>

      For whom she glad would die!<br/>
</p>

<p>  But, hark, he speaks! Oh, precious word!<br/>

      And she has heard indeed!<br/>

  "When did we see thee naked, Lord,<br/>

      And clothed thee in thy need?"<br/>
</p>

<p>  "The King shall answer, Inasmuch<br/>

      As to my brethren ye<br/>

  Did it—even to the least of such—<br/>

      Ye did it unto me."<br/>
</p>

<p>  Home, home she went, and plied the loom,<br/>

      And Jesus' poor arrayed.<br/>

  She died—they wept about the room,<br/>

      And showed the coats she made.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="marriage-song" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Marriage Song</h2>
<p>  "They have no more wine!" she said.<br/>

  But they had enough of bread;<br/>

  And the vessels by the door<br/>

  Held for thirst a plenteous store:<br/>

  Yes, <i>enough</i>; but Love divine<br/>

  Turned the water into wine!<br/>
</p>

<p>  When should wine like water flow,<br/>

  But when home two glad hearts go!<br/>

  When, in sacred bondage bound,<br/>

  Soul in soul hath freedom found!<br/>

  Such the time when, holy sign,<br/>

  Jesus turned the water wine.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Good is all the feasting then;<br/>

  Good the merry words of men;<br/>

  Good the laughter and the smiles;<br/>

  Good the wine that grief beguiles;—<br/>

  Crowning good, the Word divine<br/>

  Turning water into wine!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Friends, the Master with you dwell!<br/>

  Daily work this miracle!<br/>

  When fair things too common grow,<br/>

  Bring again their heavenly show!<br/>

  Ever at your table dine,<br/>

  Turning water into wine!<br/>
</p>

<p>  So at last you shall descry<br/>

  All the patterns of the sky:<br/>

  Earth a heaven of short abode;<br/>

  Houses temples unto God;<br/>

  Water-pots, to vision fine,<br/>

  Brimming full of heavenly wine.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="blind-bartimeus" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Blind Bartimeus</h2>
<p>  As Jesus went into Jericho town,<br/>

  Twas darkness all, from toe to crown,<br/>

        About blind Bartimeus.<br/>

  He said, "My eyes are more than dim,<br/>

  They are no use for seeing him:<br/>

        No matter—he can see us!"<br/>
</p>

<p>  "Cry out, cry out, blind brother—cry;<br/>

  Let not salvation dear go by.—<br/>

        Have mercy, Son of David."<br/>

  Though they were blind, they both could hear—<br/>

  They heard, and cried, and he drew near;<br/>

        And so the blind were saved.<br/>
</p>

<p>  O Jesus Christ, I am very blind;<br/>

  Nothing comes through into my mind;<br/>

        'Tis well I am not dumb:<br/>

  Although I see thee not, nor hear,<br/>

  I cry because thou may'st be near:<br/>

        O son of Mary, come!<br/>
</p>

<p>  I hear it through the all things blind:<br/>

  Is it thy voice, so gentle and kind—<br/>

        "Poor eyes, no more be dim"?<br/>

  A hand is laid upon mine eyes;<br/>

  I hear, and hearken, see, and rise;—<br/>

        'Tis He! I follow him!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="come-unto-me" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Come Unto Me</h2>
<p>  Come unto me, the Master says:—<br/>

      But how? I am not good;<br/>

  No thankful song my heart will raise,<br/>

      Nor even wish it could.<br/>
</p>

<p>  I am not sorry for the past,<br/>

      Nor able not to sin;<br/>

  The weary strife would ever last<br/>

      If once I should begin!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Hast thou no burden then to bear?<br/>

      No action to repent?<br/>

  Is all around so very fair?<br/>

      Is thy heart quite content?<br/>
</p>

<p>  Hast thou no sickness in thy soul?<br/>

      No labour to endure?<br/>

  Then go in peace, for thou art whole;<br/>

      Thou needest not his cure.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Ah, mock me not! I often sigh;<br/>

      I have a nameless grief,<br/>

  A faint sad pain—but such that I<br/>

      Can look for no relief.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Come, come to him who made thy heart;<br/>

      Come weary and oppressed;<br/>

  To come to Jesus is thy part,<br/>

      His part to give thee rest.<br/>
</p>

<p>  New grief, new hope he will bestow,<br/>

      Thy grief and pain to quell;<br/>

  Into thy heart himself will go,<br/>

      And that will make thee well.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="blessed-are-the-poor-in-spirit" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Blessed Are the Poor in Spirit</h2>
		</article>
		<article id="blessed-are-they-that-mourn" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Blessed Are They That Mourn</h2>
		</article>
		<article id="blessed-are-the-meek" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Blessed Are the Meek</h2>
		</article>
		<article id="blessed-are-they-that-hunger-and-thirst" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Blessed Are They That Hunger and Thirst</h2>
		</article>
		<article id="blessed-are-the-merciful" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Blessed Are the Merciful</h2>
		</article>
		<article id="blessed-are-the-pure-in-heart" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Blessed Are the Pure in Heart</h2>
		</article>
		<article id="morning-hymn" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Morning Hymn</h2>
<p>  O Lord of life, thy quickening voice<br/>

      Awakes my morning song!<br/>

  In gladsome words I would rejoice<br/>

      That I to thee belong.<br/>
</p>

<p>  I see thy light, I feel thy wind;<br/>

      The world, it is thy word;<br/>

  Whatever wakes my heart and mind,<br/>

      Thy presence is, my Lord.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The living soul which I call me<br/>

      Doth love, and long to know;<br/>

  It is a thought of living thee,<br/>

      Nor forth of thee can go.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Therefore I choose my highest part,<br/>

      And turn my face to thee;<br/>

  Therefore I stir my inmost heart<br/>

      To worship fervently.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Lord, let me live and will this day—<br/>

      Keep rising from the dead;<br/>

  Lord, make my spirit good and gay—<br/>

      Give me my daily bread.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Within my heart, speak, Lord, speak on,<br/>

      My heart alive to keep,<br/>

  Till comes the night, and, labour done,<br/>

      In thee I fall asleep.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="evening-hymn" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Evening Hymn</h2>
<p>  O God, whose daylight leadeth down<br/>

      Into the sunless way,<br/>

  Who with restoring sleep dost crown<br/>

      The labour of the day!<br/>
</p>

<p>  What I have done, Lord, make it clean<br/>

      With thy forgiveness dear;<br/>

  That so to-day what might have been,<br/>

      To-morrow may appear.<br/>
</p>

<p>  And when my thought is all astray,<br/>

      Yet think thou on in me;<br/>

  That with the new-born innocent day<br/>

      My soul rise fresh and free.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Nor let me wander all in vain<br/>

      Through dreams that mock and flee;<br/>

  But even in visions of the brain,<br/>

      Go wandering toward thee.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="noontide-hymn" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Noontide Hymn</h2>
<p>  I love thy skies, thy sunny mists,<br/>

      Thy fields, thy mountains hoar,<br/>

  Thy wind that bloweth where it lists—<br/>

      Thy will, I love it more.<br/>
</p>

<p>  I love thy hidden truth to seek<br/>

      All round, in sea, on shore;<br/>

  The arts whereby like gods we speak—<br/>

      Thy will to me is more.<br/>
</p>

<p>  I love thy men and women, Lord,<br/>

      The children round thy door;<br/>

  Calm thoughts that inward strength afford—<br/>

      Thy will than these is more.<br/>
</p>

<p>  But when thy will my life doth hold<br/>

      Thine to the very core,<br/>

  The world, which that same will doth mould,<br/>

      I love, then, ten times more!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-thankless-lady" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Thankless Lady</h2>
<p>It is May, and the moon leans down at night<br/>

  Over a blossomy land;<br/>

Leans from her window a lady white,<br/>

  With her cheek upon her hand.<br/>
</p>

<p>"Oh, why in the blue so misty, moon?<br/>

  Why so dull in the sky?<br/>

Thou look'st like one that is ready to swoon<br/>

  Because her tear-well is dry.<br/>
</p>

<p>"Enough, enough of longing and wail!<br/>

  Oh, bird, I pray thee, be glad!<br/>

Sing to me once, dear nightingale,<br/>

  The old song, merry mad.<br/>
</p>

<p>"Hold, hold with thy blossoming, colourless, cold,<br/>

  Apple-tree white as woe!<br/>

Blossom yet once with the blossom of old,<br/>

  Let the roses shine through the snow!"<br/>
</p>

<p>The moon and the blossoms they gloomily gleam,<br/>

  The bird will not be glad:<br/>

The dead never speak when the mournful dream,<br/>

  They are too weak and sad.<br/>
</p>

<p>Listened she listless till night grew late,<br/>

  Bound by a weary spell;<br/>

Then clanked the latch of the garden-gate,<br/>

  And a wondrous thing befell:<br/>
</p>

<p>Out burst the gladness, up dawned the love.<br/>

  In the song, in the waiting show;<br/>

Grew silver the moon in the sky above.<br/>

  Blushed rosy the blossom below.<br/>
</p>

<p>But the merry bird, nor the silvery moon,<br/>

  Nor the blossoms that flushed the night<br/>

Had one poor thanks for the granted boon:<br/>

  The lady forgot them quite!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-sea-shell" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Sea-Shell</h2>
		</article>
		<article id="autumn-song" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Autumn Song</h2>
<p>  Autumn clouds are flying, flying<br/>

    O'er the waste of blue;<br/>

  Summer flowers are dying, dying,<br/>

    Late so lovely new.<br/>

  Labouring wains are slowly rolling<br/>

    Home with winter grain;<br/>

  Holy bells are slowly tolling<br/>

    Over buried men.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Goldener light sets noon a sleeping<br/>

    Like an afternoon;<br/>

  Colder airs come stealing, creeping<br/>

    From the misty moon;<br/>

  And the leaves, of old age dying,<br/>

    Earthy hues put on;<br/>

  Out on every lone wind sighing<br/>

    That their day is gone.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Autumn's sun is sinking, sinking<br/>

    Down to winter low;<br/>

  And our hearts are thinking, thinking<br/>

    Of the sleet and snow;<br/>

  For our sun is slowly sliding<br/>

    Down the hill of might;<br/>

  And no moon is softly gliding<br/>

    Up the slope of night.<br/>
</p>

<p>  See the bare fields' pillaged prizes<br/>

    Heaped in golden glooms!<br/>

  See, the earth's outworn sunrises<br/>

    Dream in cloudy tombs!<br/>

  Darkling flowers but wait the blowing<br/>

    Of a quickening wind;<br/>

  And the man, through Death's door going,<br/>

    Leaves old Death behind.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Mourn not, then, clear tones that alter;<br/>

    Let the gold turn gray;<br/>

  Feet, though feeble, still may falter<br/>

    Toward the better day!<br/>

  Brother, let not weak faith linger<br/>

    O'er a withered thing;<br/>

  Mark how Autumn's prophet finger<br/>

    Burns to hues of Spring.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="spring-song" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Spring Song</h2>
<p>      Days of old,<br/>

  Ye are not dead, though gone from me;<br/>

        Ye are not cold,<br/>

  But like the summer-birds fled o'er some sea.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The sun brings back the swallows fast<br/>

        O'er the sea;<br/>

  When he cometh at the last,<br/>

  The days of old come back to me.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="what-makes-summer" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">What Makes Summer?</h2>
<p>  Winter froze both brook and well;<br/>

Fast and fast the snowflakes fell;<br/>

Children gathered round the hearth<br/>

Made a summer of their mirth;<br/>

When a boy, so lately come<br/>

That his life was yet one sum<br/>

Of delights—of aimless rambles.<br/>

Romps and dreams and games and gambols,<br/>

Thought aloud: "I wish I knew<br/>

What makes summer—that I do!"<br/>

Father heard, and it did show him<br/>

How to write a little poem.<br/>
</p>

<p>  What makes summer, little one,<br/>

Do you ask? It is the sun.<br/>

Want of heat is all the harm,<br/>

Summer is but winter warm.<br/>

'Tis the sun—yes, that one there,<br/>

Dim and gray, low in the air!<br/>

Now he looks at us askance,<br/>

But will lift his countenance<br/>

Higher up, and look down straighter.<br/>

Rise much earlier, set much later,<br/>

Till we sing out, "Hail, Well-comer,<br/>

Thou hast brought our own old Summer!"<br/>
</p>

<p>  When the sun thus rises early<br/>

And keeps shining all day rarely,<br/>

Up he draws the larks to meet him,<br/>

Earth's bird-angels, wild to greet him;<br/>

Up he draws the clouds, and pours<br/>

Down again their shining showers;<br/>

Out he draws the grass and clover,<br/>

Daisies, buttercups all over;<br/>

Out he wiles all flowers to stare<br/>

At their father in the air—<br/>

He all light, they how much duller,<br/>

Yet son-suns of every colour!<br/>

Then he draws their odours out,<br/>

Sends them on the winds about.<br/>

Next he draws out flying things—<br/>

Out of eggs, fast-flapping wings;<br/>

Out of lumps like frozen snails,<br/>

Butterflies with splendid sails;<br/>

Draws the blossoms from the trees,<br/>

From their hives the buzzy bees,<br/>

Golden things from muddy cracks—<br/>

Beetles with their burnished backs;<br/>

Laughter draws he from the river<br/>

Gleaming back to the gleam-giver;<br/>

Light he sends to every nook<br/>

That no creature be forsook;<br/>

Draws from gloom and pain and sadness,<br/>

Hope and blessing, peace and gladness,<br/>

Making man's heart sing and shine<br/>

With his brilliancy divine:<br/>

Summer, thus it is he makes it,<br/>

And the little child he takes it.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Day's work done, adown the west<br/>

Lingering he goes to rest;<br/>

Like a child, who, blissful yet,<br/>

Is unwilling to forget,<br/>

And, though sleepy, heels and head,<br/>

Thinks he cannot go to bed.<br/>

Even when down behind the hill<br/>

Back his bright look shineth still,<br/>

Whose keen glory with the night<br/>

Makes the lovely gray twilight—<br/>

Drawing out the downy owl,<br/>

With his musical bird-howl;<br/>

Drawing out the leathery bats—<br/>

Mice they are, turned airy cats—<br/>

Noiseless, sly, and slippery things<br/>

Swimming through the air on wings;<br/>

Drawing out the feathery moth,<br/>

Lazy, drowsy, very loath;<br/>

Drawing children to the door<br/>

For one goodnight-frolic more;<br/>

Drawing from the glow-worms' tails<br/>

Glimmers green in grassy dales;<br/>

Making ocean's phosphor-flashes<br/>

Glow as if they were sun-ashes.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Then the moon comes up the hill,<br/>

Wide awake, but dreaming still,<br/>

Soft and slow, as if in fear<br/>

Lest her path should not be clear.<br/>

Like a timid lady she<br/>

Looks around her daintily,<br/>

Begs the clouds to come about her,<br/>

Tells the stars to shine without her,<br/>

Then unveils, and, bolder grown,<br/>

Climbs the steps of her blue throne:<br/>

Stately in a calm delight,<br/>

Mistress of a whole fair night,<br/>

Lonely but for stars a few,<br/>

There she sits in silence blue,<br/>

And the world before her lies<br/>

Faint, a round shade in the skies!<br/>
</p>

<p>  But what fun is all about<br/>

When the humans are shut out!<br/>

Shadowy to the moon, the earth<br/>

Is a very world of mirth!<br/>

Night is then a dream opaque<br/>

Full of creatures wide awake!<br/>

Noiseless then, on feet or wings,<br/>

Out they come, all moon-eyed things!<br/>

In and out they pop and play,<br/>

Have it all their own wild way,<br/>

Fly and frolic, scamper, glow;<br/>

Treat the moon, for all her show,<br/>

State, and opal diadem,<br/>

Like a nursemaid watching them.<br/>

And the nightingale doth snare<br/>

All the merry tumult rare,<br/>

All the music and the magic,<br/>

All the comic and the tragic,<br/>

All the wisdom and the riot<br/>

Of the midnight moonlight diet,<br/>

In a diamond hoop of song,<br/>

Which he trundles all night long.<br/>
</p>

<p>  What doth make the sun, you ask,<br/>

Able for such mighty task?<br/>

He is not a lamp hung high<br/>

Sliding up and down the sky,<br/>

He is carried in a hand:<br/>

That's what makes him strong and grand!<br/>

From that hand comes all his power;<br/>

If it set him down one hour,<br/>

Yea, one moment set him by,<br/>

In that moment he would die,<br/>

And the winter, ice, and snow<br/>

Come on us, and never go.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Need I tell you whose the hand<br/>

Bears him high o'er sea and land?<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-mistletoe" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Mistletoe</h2>
<p>  Kiss me: there now, little Neddy,<br/>

Do you see her staring steady?<br/>

There again you had a chance of her!<br/>

Didn't you catch the pretty glance of her?<br/>

See her nest! On any planet<br/>

Never was a sweeter than it!<br/>

Never nest was such as this is:<br/>

Tis the nest of all the kisses,<br/>

With the mother kiss-bird sitting<br/>

All through Christmas, never flitting,<br/>

Kisses, kisses, kisses hatching,<br/>

Sweetest birdies, for the catching!<br/>

Oh, the precious little brood<br/>

Always in a loving mood!—<br/>

There's one under Mamy's hood!<br/>
</p>

<p>  There, that's one I caught this minute,<br/>

Musical as any linnet!<br/>

Where it is, your big eyes question,<br/>

With of doubt a wee suggestion?<br/>

There it is—upon mouth merry!<br/>

There it is—upon cheek cherry!<br/>

There's another on chin-chinnie!<br/>

Now it's off, and lights on Minnie!<br/>

There's another on nose-nosey!<br/>

There's another on lip-rosy!<br/>

And the kissy-bird is hatching<br/>

Hundreds more for only catching.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Why the mistletoe she chooses,<br/>

And the Christmas-tree refuses?<br/>

There's a puzzle for your mother?<br/>

I'll present you with another!<br/>

Tell me why, you question-asker,<br/>

Cruel, heartless mother-tasker—<br/>

Why, of all the trees before her,<br/>

Gathered round, or spreading o'er her,<br/>

Jenny Wren should choose the apple<br/>

For her nursery and chapel!<br/>

Or Jack Daw build in the steeple<br/>

High above the praying people!<br/>

Tell me why the limping plover<br/>

O'er moist meadow likes to hover;<br/>

Why the partridge with such trouble<br/>

Builds her nest where soon the stubble<br/>

Will betray her hop-thumb-cheepers<br/>

To the eyes of all the reapers!—<br/>

Tell me, Charley; tell me, Janey;<br/>

Answer all, or answer any,<br/>

And I'll tell you, with much pleasure,<br/>

Why this little bird of treasure<br/>

Nestles only in the mistletoe,<br/>

Never, never goes the thistle to.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Not an answer? Tell without it?<br/>

Yes—all that I know about it:—<br/>

Mistletoe, then, cannot flourish,<br/>

Cannot find the food to nourish<br/>

But on other plant when planted—<br/>

And for kissing two are wanted.<br/>

That is why the kissy-birdie<br/>

Looks about for oak-tree sturdy<br/>

And the plant that grows upon it<br/>

Like a wax-flower on a bonnet.<br/>
</p>

<p>  But, my blessed little mannie,<br/>

All the birdies are not cannie<br/>

That the kissy-birdie hatches!<br/>

Some are worthless little patches,<br/>

Which indeed if they don't smutch you,<br/>

'Tis they're dead before they touch you!<br/>

While for kisses vain and greedy,<br/>

Kisses flattering, kisses needy,<br/>

They are birds that never waddled<br/>

Out of eggs that only addled!<br/>

Some there are leave spots behind them,<br/>

On your cheek for years you'd find them:<br/>

Little ones, I do beseech you,<br/>

Never let such birdies reach you.<br/>
</p>

<p>  It depends what net you venture<br/>

What the sort of bird will enter!<br/>

I will tell you in a minute<br/>

What net takes kiss—lark or linnet—<br/>

Any bird indeed worth hatching<br/>

And just therefore worth the catching:<br/>

The one net that never misses<br/>

Catching at least some true kisses,<br/>

Is the heart that, loving truly,<br/>

Always loves the old love newly;<br/>

But to spread out would undo it—<br/>

Let the birdies fly into it.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="wild-flowers" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Wild Flowers</h2>
<p>  Content Primroses,<br/>

  With hearts at rest in your thick leaves' soft care,<br/>

  Peeping as from his mother's lap the child<br/>

  Who courts shy shelter from his own open air!—<br/>

  Hanging Harebell,<br/>

  Whose blue heaven to no wanderer ever closes,<br/>

  Though thou still lookest earthward from thy domed cell!—<br/>

  Fluttering-wild<br/>

  Anemone, so well<br/>

  Named of the Wind, to whom thou, fettered-free,<br/>

  Yieldest thee, helpless—wilfully,<br/>

  With <i>Take me or leave me,<br/>

  Sweet Wind, I am thine own Anemone</i>!—<br/>

  Thirsty Arum, ever dreaming<br/>

  Of lakes in wildernesses gleaming!—<br/>

  Fire-winged Pimpernel,<br/>

  Communing with some hidden well,<br/>

  And secrets with the sun-god holding,<br/>

  At fixed hour folding and unfolding!—<br/>

  How is it with you, children all,<br/>

  When human children on you fall,<br/>

  Gather you in eager haste,<br/>

  Spoil your plenty with their waste—<br/>

  Fill and fill their dropping hands?<br/>

  Feel you hurtfully disgraced<br/>

  By their injurious demands?<br/>

  Do you know them from afar,<br/>

  Shuddering at their merry hum,<br/>

  Growing faint as near they come?<br/>

  Blind and deaf they think you are—<br/>

  Is it only ye are dumb?<br/>

  You alive at least, I think,<br/>

  Trembling almost on the brink<br/>

  Of our lonely consciousness:<br/>

  If it be so,<br/>

  Take this comfort for your woe,<br/>

  For the breaking of your rest,<br/>

  For the tearing in your breast,<br/>

  For the blotting of the sun,<br/>

  For the death too soon begun,<br/>

  For all else beyond redress—<br/>

  Or what seemeth so to be—<br/>

  That the children's wonder-springs<br/>

  Bubble high at sight of you,<br/>

  Lovely, lowly, common things:<br/>

  In you more than you they see!<br/>

  Take this too—that, walking out,<br/>

  Looking fearlessly about,<br/>

  Ye rebuke our manhood's doubt,<br/>

  And our childhood's faith renew;<br/>

  So that we, with old age nigh,<br/>

  Seeing you alive and well<br/>

  Out of winter's crucible,<br/>

  Hearing you, from graveyard crept,<br/>

  Tell us that ye only slept—<br/>

  Think we die not, though we die.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Thus ye die not, though ye die—<br/>

  Only yield your being up,<br/>

  Like a nectar-holding cup:<br/>

  Deaf, ye give to them that hear,<br/>

  With a greatness lovely-dear;<br/>

  Blind, ye give to them that see—<br/>

  Poor, but bounteous royally.<br/>

  Lowly servants to the higher,<br/>

  Burning upwards in the fire<br/>

  Of Nature's endless sacrifice,<br/>

  In great Life's ascent ye rise,<br/>

  Leave the lowly earth behind,<br/>

  Pass into the human mind,<br/>

  Pass with it up into God,<br/>

  Whence ye came though through the clod—<br/>

  Pass, and find yourselves at home<br/>

  Where but life can go and come;<br/>

  Where all life is in its nest,<br/>

  At loving one with holy Best;—<br/>

  Who knows?—with shadowy, dawning sense<br/>

  Of a past, age-long somnolence!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="professor-noctutus" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Professor Noctutus</h2>
<p>Nobody knows the world but me.<br/>

The rest go to bed; I sit up and see.<br/>

I'm a better observer than any of you all,<br/>

For I never look out till the twilight fall,<br/>

And never then without green glasses,<br/>

And that is how my wisdom passes.<br/>
</p>

<p>I never think, for that is not fit:<br/>

<i>I observe.</i> I have seen the white moon sit<br/>

On her nest, the sea, like a fluffy owl,<br/>

Hatching the boats and the long-legged fowl!<br/>

When the oysters gape—you may make a note—<br/>

She drops a pearl into every throat.<br/>
</p>

<p>I can see the wind: can you do that?<br/>

I see the dreams he has in his hat,<br/>

I see him shaking them out as he goes,<br/>

I see them rush in at man's snoring nose.<br/>

Ten thousand things you could not think,<br/>

I can write down plain with pen and ink!<br/>
</p>

<p>You know that I know; therefore pull off your hat,<br/>

Whether round and tall, or square and flat:<br/>

You cannot do better than trust in me;<br/>

You may shut your eyes in fact—<i>I</i> see!<br/>

Lifelong I will lead you, and then, like the owl,<br/>

I will bury you nicely with my spade and showl.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="bird-songs" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Bird-Songs</h2>
<p>I will sing a song,<br/>

  Said the owl.<br/>

You sing a song, sing-song<br/>

  Ugly fowl!<br/>

What will you sing about,<br/>

Night in and day out?<br/>
</p>

<p>All about the night,<br/>

  When the gray<br/>

With her cloak smothers bright,<br/>

  Hard, sharp day.<br/>

Oh, the moon! the cool dew!<br/>

And the shadows!—tu-whoo!<br/>
</p>

<p>I will sing a song,<br/>

  Said the nightingale.<br/>

Sing a song, long, long,<br/>

  Little Neverfail!<br/>

What will you sing about,<br/>

Day in or day out?<br/>
</p>

<p>All about the light<br/>

  Gone away,<br/>

Down, away, and out of sight:<br/>

  Wake up, day!<br/>

For the master is not dead,<br/>

Only gone to bed.<br/>
</p>

<p>I will sing a song,<br/>

  Said the lark.<br/>

Sing, sing, Throat-strong,<br/>

  Little Kill-the-dark!<br/>

What will you sing about,<br/>

Day in and night out?<br/>
</p>

<p>I can only call!<br/>

  I can't think!<br/>

Let me up, that's all!<br/>

  I see a chink!<br/>

I've been thirsting all night<br/>

For the glorious light!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-unseen-model" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Unseen Model</h2>
<p>Forth to his study the sculptor goes<br/>

  In a mood of lofty mirth:<br/>

"Now shall the tongues of my carping foes<br/>

  Confess what my art is worth!<br/>

In my brain last night the vision arose,<br/>

  To-morrow shall see its birth!"<br/>
</p>

<p>He stood like a god; with creating hand<br/>

  He struck the formless clay:<br/>

"Psyche, arise," he said, "and stand;<br/>

  In beauty confront the day.<br/>

I have sought nor found thee in any land;<br/>

  I call thee: arise; obey!"<br/>
</p>

<p>The sun was low in the eastern skies<br/>

  When spoke the confident youth;<br/>

Sweet Psyche, all day, his hands and eyes<br/>

  Wiled from the clay uncouth,<br/>

Nor ceased when the shadows came up like spies<br/>

  That dog the steps of Truth.<br/>
</p>

<p>He said, "I will do my will in spite<br/>

  Of the rising dark; for, see,<br/>

She grows to my hand! The mar-work night<br/>

  Shall hurry and hide and flee<br/>

From the glow of my lamp and the making might<br/>

  That passeth out of me!"<br/>
</p>

<p>In the flickering lamplight the figure swayed,<br/>

  In the shadows did melt and swim:<br/>

With tool and thumb he modelled and made,<br/>

  Nor knew that feature and limb<br/>

Half-obeying, half-disobeyed,<br/>

  And mocking eluded him.<br/>
</p>

<p>At the dawning Psyche of his brain<br/>

  Joyous he wrought all night:<br/>

The oil went low, and he trimmed in vain,<br/>

  The lamp would not burn bright;<br/>

But he still wrought on: through the high roof-pane<br/>

  He saw the first faint light!<br/>
</p>

<p>The dark retreated; the morning spread;<br/>

  His creatures their shapes resume;<br/>

The plaster stares dumb-white and dead;<br/>

  A faint blue liquid bloom<br/>

Lies on each marble bosom and head;<br/>

  To his Psyche clings the gloom.<br/>
</p>

<p>Backward he stept to see the clay:<br/>

  His visage grew white and sear;<br/>

No beauty ideal confronted the day,<br/>

  No Psyche from upper sphere,<br/>

But a once loved shape that in darkness lay,<br/>

  Buried a lonesome year!<br/>
</p>

<p>From maidenhood's wilderness fair and wild<br/>

  A girl to his charm had hied:<br/>

He had blown out the lamp of the trusting child,<br/>

  And in the darkness she died;<br/>

Now from the clay she sadly smiled,<br/>

  And the sculptor stood staring-eyed.<br/>
</p>

<p>He had summoned Psyche—and Psyche crept<br/>

  From a half-forgotten tomb;<br/>

She brought her sad smile, that still she kept,<br/>

  Her eyes she left in the gloom!<br/>

High grace had found him, for now he wept,<br/>

  And love was his endless doom!<br/>
</p>

<p>Night-long he pined, all day did rue;<br/>

  He haunted her form with sighs:<br/>

As oft as his clay to a lady grew<br/>

  The carvers, with dim surmise,<br/>

Would whisper, "The same shape come to woo,<br/>

  With its blindly beseeching eyes!"<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="legend-of-the-corrievrechan" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Legend of the Corrievrechan</h2>
<p>Prince Breacan of Denmark was lord of the strand<br/>

  And lord of the billowy sea;<br/>

Lord of the sea and lord of the land,<br/>

  He might have let maidens be!<br/>
</p>

<p>A maiden he met with locks of gold,<br/>

  Straying beside the sea:<br/>

Maidens listened in days of old,<br/>

  And repented grievously.<br/>
</p>

<p>Wiser he left her in evil wiles,<br/>

  Went sailing over the sea;<br/>

Came to the lord of the Western Isles:<br/>

  Give me thy daughter, said he.<br/>
</p>

<p>The lord of the Isles he laughed, and said:<br/>

  Only a king of the sea<br/>

May think the Maid of the Isles to wed,<br/>

  And such, men call not thee!<br/>
</p>

<p>Hold thine own three nights and days<br/>

  In yon whirlpool of the sea,<br/>

Or turn thy prow and go thy ways<br/>

  And let the isle-maiden be.<br/>
</p>

<p>Prince Breacan he turned his dragon prow<br/>

  To Denmark over the sea:<br/>

Wise women, he said, now tell me how<br/>

  In yon whirlpool to anchor me.<br/>
</p>

<p>Make a cable of hemp and a cable of wool<br/>

  And a cable of maidens' hair,<br/>

And hie thee back to the roaring pool<br/>

  And anchor in safety there.<br/>
</p>

<p>The smiths of Greydule, on the eve of Yule,<br/>

  Will forge three anchors rare;<br/>

The hemp thou shalt pull, thou shalt shear the wool,<br/>

  And the maidens will bring their hair.<br/>
</p>

<p>Of the hair that is brown thou shalt twist one strand,<br/>

  Of the hair that is raven another;<br/>

Of the golden hair thou shalt twine a band<br/>

  To bind the one to the other!<br/>
</p>

<p>The smiths of Greydule, on the eve of Yule,<br/>

  They forged three anchors rare;<br/>

The hemp he did pull, and he shore the wool,<br/>

  And the maidens brought their hair.<br/>
</p>

<p>He twisted the brown hair for one strand,<br/>

  The raven hair for another;<br/>

He twined the golden hair in a band<br/>

  To bind the one to the other.<br/>
</p>

<p>He took the cables of hemp and wool.<br/>

  He took the cable of hair,<br/>

He hied him back to the roaring pool,<br/>

  He cast the three anchors there.<br/>
</p>

<p>The whirlpool roared, and the day went by,<br/>

  And night came down on the sea;<br/>

But or ever the morning broke the sky<br/>

  The hemp was broken in three.<br/>
</p>

<p>The night it came down, the whirlpool it ran,<br/>

  The wind it fiercely blew;<br/>

And or ever the second morning began<br/>

  The wool it parted in two.<br/>
</p>

<p>The storm it roared all day the third,<br/>

  The whirlpool wallowed about,<br/>

The night came down like a wild black bird,<br/>

  But the cable of hair held out.<br/>
</p>

<p>Round and round with a giddy swing<br/>

  Went the sea-king through the dark;<br/>

Round went the rope in the swivel-ring,<br/>

  Round reeled the straining bark.<br/>
</p>

<p>Prince Breacan he stood on his dragon prow,<br/>

  A lantern in his hand:<br/>

Blest be the maidens of Denmark now,<br/>

  By them shall Denmark stand!<br/>
</p>

<p>He watched the rope through the tempest black<br/>

  A lantern in his hold:<br/>

Out, out, alack! one strand will crack!<br/>

  It is the strand of gold!<br/>
</p>

<p>The third morn clear and calm came out:<br/>

  No anchored ship was there!<br/>

The golden strand in the cable stout<br/>

  Was not all of maidens' hair.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-dead-hand" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Dead Hand</h2>
<p>The witch lady walked along the strand,<br/>

  Heard a roaring of the sea,<br/>

On the edge of a pool saw a dead man's hand,<br/>

  Good thing for a witch lady!<br/>
</p>

<p>Lightly she stepped across the rocks,<br/>

  Came where the dead man lay:<br/>

Now pretty maid with your merry mocks,<br/>

  Now I shall have my way!<br/>
</p>

<p>On a finger shone a sapphire blue<br/>

  In the heart of six rubies red:<br/>

Come back to me, my promise true,<br/>

  Come back, my ring, she said.<br/>
</p>

<p>She took the dead hand in the live,<br/>

  And at the ring drew she;<br/>

The dead hand closed its fingers five,<br/>

  And it held the witch lady.<br/>
</p>

<p>She swore the storm was not her deed,<br/>

  Dark spells she backward spoke;<br/>

If the dead man heard he took no heed,<br/>

  But held like a cloven oak.<br/>
</p>

<p>Deathly cold, crept up the tide,<br/>

  Sure of her, made no haste;<br/>

Crept up to her knees, crept up each side,<br/>

  Crept up to her wicked waist.<br/>
</p>

<p>Over the blue sea sailed the bride<br/>

  In her love's own sailing ship,<br/>

And the witch she saw them across the tide<br/>

  As it rose to her lying lip.<br/>
</p>

<p>Oh, the heart of the dead and the hand of the dead<br/>

  Are strong hasps they to hold!<br/>

Fled the true dove with the kite's new love,<br/>

  And left the false kite with the old.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="annie-shes-dowie" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Annie She's Dowie</h2>
<p>Annie she's dowie, and Willie he's wae:<br/>

What can be the matter wi' siccan a twae,<br/>

For Annie she's fair as the first o' the day,<br/>

And Willie he's honest and stalwart and gay?<br/>
</p>

<p>Oh, the tane has a daddy is poor and is proud,<br/>

And the tither a minnie that cleiks at the goud '.<br/>

They lo'ed are anither, and said their say,<br/>

But the daddy and minnie hae partit the twae!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="o-lassie-ayont-the-hill" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">O Lassie Ayont the Hill!</h2>
<p>O lassie ayont the hill,<br/>

Come ower the tap o' the hill,<br/>

Come ower the tap wi' the breeze o' the hill,<br/>

Bidena ayont the hill!<br/>

  I'm needin ye sair the nicht,<br/>

For I'm tired and sick o' mysel.<br/>

  A body's sel 's the sairest weicht:<br/>

O lassie, come ower the hill!<br/>
</p>

<p>Gien a body could be a thoucht o' grace,<br/>

  And no a sel ava!<br/>

I'm sick o' my heid and my ban's and my face,<br/>

  O' my thouchts and mysel and a';<br/>
</p>

<p>  I'm sick o' the warl' and a';<br/>

The win' gangs by wi' a hiss;<br/>

  Throu my starin een the sunbeams fa'<br/>

But my weary hert they miss!<br/>

    O lassie ayont the hill,<br/>

      Come ower the tap o' the hill,<br/>

    Come ower the tap wi' the breeze o' the hill,<br/>

      Bidena ayont the hill! &amp;c.<br/>
</p>

<p>For gien I but saw yer bonnie heid,<br/>

  And the sunlicht o' yer hair,<br/>

The ghaist o' mysel wud fa' doun deid,<br/>

  I wud be mysel nae mair.<br/>

  I wud be mysel nae mair,<br/>

Filled o' the sole remeid,<br/>

  Slain by the arrows o' licht frae yer hair,<br/>

Killed by yer body and heid!<br/>

    O lassie ayont the hill, &amp;c.<br/>
</p>

<p>My sel micht wauk up at the saft fitfa'<br/>

  O' my bonnie departin dame;<br/>

But gien she lo'ed me ever sae sma'<br/>

  I micht bide it—the weary same!<br/>

  Noo, sick o' my body and name<br/>

Whan it lifts its upsettin heid,<br/>

  I turn frae the cla'es that cover my frame<br/>

As gien they war roun the deid.<br/>

    O lassie ayont the hill, &amp;c.<br/>
</p>

<p>But gien ye lo'ed me as I lo'e you<br/>

  I wud ring my ain deid knell;<br/>

The spectre wud melt, shot through and through<br/>

  Wi' the shine o' your sunny sel!<br/>

  By the shine o' yer sunny sel,<br/>

By the licht aneth yer broo<br/>

  I wud dee to mysel, ring my ain deid-bell,<br/>

And live again in you!<br/>
</p>

<p>O lassie ayont the hill,<br/>

Come ower the tap o' the hill,<br/>

Come ower the tap wi' the breeze o' the hill,<br/>

  For I want ye sair the nicht!<br/>

  I'm needin ye sair the nicht,<br/>

For I'm tired and sick o' mysel.<br/>

  A body's sel 's the sairest weicht:<br/>

O lassie, come ower the hill!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-sang-o-zion" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Sang O' Zion</h2>
<p>Ane by ane they gang awa;<br/>

The getherer gethers grit and sma':<br/>

Ane by ane maks ane and a'!<br/>
</p>

<p>Aye whan ane sets doon the cup<br/>

Ane ahint maun tak it up:<br/>

A' thegither they will sup!<br/>
</p>

<p>Golden-heidit, ripe, and strang,<br/>

Shorn will be the hairst or lang:<br/>

Syne begins a better sang!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="gaein-and-comin" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Gaein and Comin</h2>
<p>Whan Andrew frae Strathbogie gaed<br/>

  The lift was lowerin dreary,<br/>

The sun he wadna raise his heid,<br/>

  The win' blew laich and eerie.<br/>

In's pooch he had a plack or twa—<br/>

  I vow he hadna mony,<br/>

Yet Andrew like a linty sang,<br/>

  For Lizzie was sae bonny!<br/>

    O Lizzie, Lizzie, bonny lassie!<br/>

    Bonny, saucy hizzy!<br/>

    What richt had ye to luik at me<br/>

    And drive me daft and dizzy?<br/>
</p>

<p>Whan Andrew to Strathbogie cam<br/>

  The sun was shinin rarely;<br/>

He rade a horse that pranced and sprang—<br/>

  I vow he sat him fairly!<br/>

And he had gowd to spen' and spare,<br/>

  And a hert as true as ony;<br/>

But his luik was doon, his sigh was sair,<br/>

  For Lizzie was sae bonny!<br/>

    O Lizzie, Lizzie, bonny hizzy!<br/>

    Aih, the sunlicht weary!<br/>

    Ye're straucht and rare—ye're fause though fair!—<br/>

    Hech, auld John Armstrong's deary!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-waesome-carl" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Waesome Carl</h2>
<p>There cam a man to oor toon-en',<br/>

  And a waesome carl was he,<br/>

Snipie-nebbit, and crookit-mou'd,<br/>

  And gleyt o' a blinterin ee.<br/>

Muckle he spied, and muckle he spak,<br/>

  But the owercome o' his sang,<br/>

Whatever it said, was aye the same:—<br/>

  There's nane o' ye a' but's wrang!<br/>

      Ye're a' wrang, and a' wrang,<br/>

      And a'thegither a' wrang:<br/>

      There's no a man aboot the toon<br/>

      But's a'thegither a' wrang.<br/>
</p>

<p>That's no the gait to fire the breid,<br/>

  Nor yet to brew the yill;<br/>

That's no the gait to haud the pleuch,<br/>

  Nor yet to ca the mill;<br/>

That's no the gait to milk the coo,<br/>

  Nor yet to spean the calf,<br/>

Nor yet to tramp the girnel-meal—<br/>

  Ye kenna yer wark by half!<br/>

      Ye're a' wrang, &amp;c.<br/>
</p>

<p>The minister wasna fit to pray<br/>

  And lat alane to preach;<br/>

He nowther had the gift o' grace<br/>

  Nor yet the gift o' speech!<br/>

He mind't him o' Balaaem's ass,<br/>

  Wi' a differ we micht ken:<br/>

The Lord he opened the ass's mou,<br/>

  The minister opened's ain!<br/>

      He was a' wrang, and a' wrang,<br/>

      And a'thegither a' wrang;<br/>

      There wasna a man aboot the toon<br/>

      But was a'thegither a' wrang!<br/>
</p>

<p>The puir precentor couldna sing,<br/>

  He gruntit like a swine;<br/>

The verra elders couldna pass<br/>

  The ladles til his min'.<br/>

And for the rulin' elder's grace<br/>

  It wasna worth a horn;<br/>

He didna half uncurse the meat,<br/>

  Nor pray for mair the morn!<br/>

      He was a' wrang, &amp;c.<br/>
</p>

<p>And aye he gied his nose a thraw,<br/>

  And aye he crook't his mou;<br/>

And aye he cockit up his ee<br/>

  And said, Tak tent the noo!<br/>

We snichert hint oor loof, my man,<br/>

  But never said him nay;<br/>

As gien he had been a prophet, man,<br/>

  We loot him say his say:<br/>

    Ye're a' wrang, &amp;c.<br/>
</p>

<p>Quo oor gudeman: The crater's daft!<br/>

  Heard ye ever sic a claik?<br/>

Lat's see gien he can turn a ban',<br/>

  Or only luik and craik!<br/>

It's true we maunna lippin til him—<br/>

  He's fairly crack wi' pride,<br/>

But he maun live—we canna kill him!<br/>

  Gien he can work, he s' bide.<br/>

    He was a' wrang, and a' wrang,<br/>

    And a'thegither a' wrang;<br/>

    There, troth, the gudeman o' the toon<br/>

    Was a'thegither a' wrang!<br/>
</p>

<p>Quo he, It's but a laddie's turn,<br/>

  But best the first be a sma' thing:<br/>

There's a' thae weyds to gether and burn,<br/>

  And he's the man for a' thing!—<br/>

We yokit for the far hill-moss,<br/>

  There was peats to cast and ca;<br/>

O' 's company we thoucht na loss,<br/>

  'Twas peace till gloamin-fa'!<br/>

    We war a' wrang, and a' wrang,<br/>

    And a'thegither a' wrang;<br/>

    There wasna man aboot the toon<br/>

    But was a'thegither a' wrang!<br/>
</p>

<p>For, losh, or it was denner-time<br/>

  The toon was in a low!<br/>

The reek rase up as it had been<br/>

  Frae Sodom-flames, I vow.<br/>

We lowst and rade like mad, for byre<br/>

  And ruck bleezt a' thegither,<br/>

As gien the deil had broucht the fire<br/>

  Frae's hell to mak anither!<br/>

    'Twas a' wrang, and a' wrang,<br/>

    And a'thegither a' wrang,<br/>

    Stick and strae aboot the place<br/>

    Was a'thegither a' wrang!<br/>
</p>

<p>And luikin on, ban's neth his tails,<br/>

  The waesome carl stude;<br/>

To see him wagglin at thae tails<br/>

  'Maist drave 's a' fairly wud.<br/>

Ain wite! he cried; I tauld ye sae!<br/>

  Ye're a' wrang to the last:<br/>

What gart ye burn thae deevilich weyds<br/>

  Whan the win' blew frae the wast!<br/>

    Ye're a' wrang, and a' wrang,<br/>

    And a'thegither a' wrang;<br/>

    There's no a man i' this fule warl<br/>

    But's a'thegither a' wrang!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-yerl-o-waterydeck" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Yerl O' Waterydeck</h2>
<p>The wind it blew, and the ship it flew,<br/>

  And it was "Hey for hame!"<br/>

But up an' cried the skipper til his crew,<br/>

  "Haud her oot ower the saut sea faem."<br/>
</p>

<p>Syne up an' spak the angry king:<br/>

  "Haud on for Dumferline!"<br/>

Quo' the skipper, "My lord, this maunna be—<br/>

  <i>I</i>'m king on this boat o' mine!"<br/>
</p>

<p>He tuik the helm intil his han',<br/>

  He left the shore un'er the lee;<br/>

Syne croodit sail, an', east an' south,<br/>

  Stude awa richt oot to sea.<br/>
</p>

<p>Quo' the king, "Leise-majesty, I trow!<br/>

  Here lies some ill-set plan!<br/>

'Bout ship!" Quo' the skipper, "Yer grace forgets<br/>

  Ye are king but o' the lan'!"<br/>
</p>

<p>Oot he heild to the open sea<br/>

  Quhill the north wind flaughtered an' fell;<br/>

Syne the east had a bitter word to say<br/>

  That waukent a watery hell.<br/>
</p>

<p>He turnt her heid intil the north:<br/>

  Quo' the nobles, "He s' droon, by the mass!"<br/>

Quo' the skipper, "Haud afif yer lady-ban's<br/>

  Or ye'll never see the Bass."<br/>
</p>

<p>The king creepit down the cabin-stair<br/>

  To drink the gude French wine;<br/>

An' up cam his dochter, the princess fair,<br/>

  An' luikit ower the brine.<br/>
</p>

<p>She turnt her face to the drivin snaw,<br/>

  To the snaw but and the weet;<br/>

It claucht her snood, an' awa like a dud<br/>

  Her hair drave oot i' the sleet.<br/>
</p>

<p>She turnt her face frae the drivin win'—<br/>

  "Quhat's that aheid?" quo' she.<br/>

The skipper he threw himsel frae the win'<br/>

  An' he brayt the helm alee.<br/>
</p>

<p>"Put to yer han', my lady fair!<br/>

  Haud up her heid!" quo' he;<br/>

"Gien she dinna face the win' a wee mair<br/>

  It's faurweel to you an' me!"<br/>
</p>

<p>To the tiller the lady she laid her han',<br/>

  An' the ship brayt her cheek to the blast;<br/>

They joukit the berg, but her quarter scraped,<br/>

  An' they luikit at ither aghast.<br/>
</p>

<p>Quo' the skipper, "Ye are a lady fair,<br/>

  An' a princess gran' to see,<br/>

But war ye a beggar, a man wud sail<br/>

  To the hell i' yer company!"<br/>
</p>

<p>She liftit a pale an' a queenly face,<br/>

  Her een flashed, an' syne they swam:<br/>

"An' what for no to the hevin?" she says,<br/>

  An' she turnt awa frae him.<br/>
</p>

<p>Bot she tuik na her han' frae the gude ship's helm<br/>

  Till the day begouth to daw;<br/>

An' the skipper he spak, but what was said<br/>

  It was said atween them twa.<br/>
</p>

<p>An' syne the gude ship she lay to,<br/>

  Wi' Scotlan' hyne un'er the lee;<br/>

An' the king cam up the cabin-stair<br/>

  Wi' wan face an' bluidshot ee.<br/>
</p>

<p>Laigh loutit the skipper upo' the deck;<br/>

  "Stan' up, stan' up," quo' the king;<br/>

"Ye're an honest loun—an' beg me a boon<br/>

  Quhan ye gie me back this ring."<br/>
</p>

<p>Lowne blew the win'; the stars cam oot;<br/>

  The ship turnt frae the north;<br/>

An' or ever the sun was up an' aboot<br/>

  They war intil the firth o' Forth.<br/>
</p>

<p>Quhan the gude ship lay at the pier-heid,<br/>

  And the king stude steady o' the lan',—<br/>

"Doon wi' ye, skipper—doon!" he said,<br/>

  "Hoo daur ye afore me stan'!"<br/>
</p>

<p>The skipper he loutit on his knee;<br/>

  The king his blade he drew:<br/>

Quo' the king, "Noo mynt ye to centre me!<br/>

  I'm aboord <i>my</i> vessel noo!<br/>
</p>

<p>"Gien I hadna been yer verra gude lord<br/>

  I wud hae thrawn yer neck!<br/>

Bot—ye wha loutit Skipper o' Doon,<br/>

  Rise up Yerl o' Waterydeck."<br/>
</p>

<p>The skipper he rasena: "Yer Grace is great,<br/>

  Yer wull it can heize or ding:<br/>

Wi' ae wee word ye hae made me a yerl—<br/>

  Wi' anither mak me a king."<br/>
</p>

<p>"I canna mak ye a king," quo' he,<br/>

  "The Lord alane can do that!<br/>

I snowk leise-majesty, my man!<br/>

  Quhat the Sathan wad ye be at?"<br/>
</p>

<p>Glowert at the skipper the doutsum king<br/>

  Jalousin aneth his croon;<br/>

Quo' the skipper, "Here is yer Grace's ring—<br/>

  An' yer dochter is my boon!"<br/>
</p>

<p>The black blude shot intil the king's face<br/>

  He wasna bonny to see:<br/>

"The rascal skipper! he lichtlies oor grace!—<br/>

  Gar hang him heigh on yon tree."<br/>
</p>

<p>Up sprang the skipper an' aboord his ship,<br/>

  Cleikit up a bytin blade<br/>

An' hackit at the cable that held her to the pier,<br/>

  An' thoucht it 'maist ower weel made.<br/>
</p>

<p>The king he blew shill in a siller whustle;<br/>

  An' tramp, tramp, doon the pier<br/>

Cam twenty men on twenty horses,<br/>

  Clankin wi' spur an' spear.<br/>
</p>

<p>At the king's fute fell his dochter fair:<br/>

  "His life ye wadna spill!"<br/>

"Ye daur stan' twixt my hert an' my hate?"<br/>

  "I daur, wi' a richt gude will!"<br/>
</p>

<p>"Ye was aye to yer faither a thrawart bairn,<br/>

  But, my lady, here stan's the king!<br/>

Luikna <i>him</i> i' the angry face—<br/>

  A monarch's anither thing!"<br/>
</p>

<p>"I lout to my father for his grace<br/>

  Low on my bendit knee;<br/>

But I stan' an' luik the king i' the face,<br/>

  For the skipper is king o' me!"<br/>
</p>

<p>She turnt, she sprang upo' the deck,<br/>

  The cable splashed i' the Forth,<br/>

Her wings sae braid the gude ship spread<br/>

  And flew east, an' syne flew north.<br/>
</p>

<p>Now was not this a king's dochter—<br/>

  A lady that feared no skaith?<br/>

A woman wi' quhilk a man micht sail<br/>

  Prood intil the Port o' Death?<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-twa-gordons" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Twa Gordons</h2>
<h5>I.</h5>

<p>There was John Gordon an' Archibold,<br/>

An' a yerl's twin sons war they;<br/>

Quhan they war are an' twenty year auld<br/>

They fell oot on their ae birthday.<br/>
</p>

<p>"Turn ye, John Gordon, nae brither to me!<br/>

Turn ye, fause an' fell!<br/>

Or doon ye s' gang, as black as a lee,<br/>

To the muckle deevil o' hell."<br/>
</p>

<p>"An' quhat for that, Archie Gordon, I pray?<br/>

Quhat ill hae I dune to thee?"<br/>

"Twa-faced loon, ye sail rue this day<br/>

The answer I'm gauin to gie!<br/>
</p>

<p>"For it'll be roucher nor lady Janet's,<br/>

An' loud i' the braid daylicht;<br/>

An' the wa' to speil is my iron mail,<br/>

No her castle-wa' by nicht!"<br/>
</p>

<p>"I speilt the wa' o' her castle braw<br/>

I' the roarin win' yestreen;<br/>

An' I sat in her bower till the gloamin sta'<br/>

Licht-fittit ahint the mune."<br/>
</p>

<p>"Turn ye, John Gordon—the twasum we s' twin!<br/>

Turn ye, an' haud yer ain;<br/>

For ane sall lie on a cauld weet bed—<br/>

An' I downa curse again!"<br/>
</p>

<p>"O Archie, Janet is my true love—<br/>

notna speir leave o' thee!"<br/>

"Gien that be true, the deevil's a sanct,<br/>

An' ye are no tellin a lee!"<br/>
</p>

<p>Their suerds they drew, an' the fire-flauchts flew,<br/>

  An' they shiftit wi' fendin feet;<br/>

An' the blude ran doon, till the grun a' roun<br/>

  Like a verra bog was weet.<br/>
</p>

<p>"O Archie, I hae gotten a cauld supper—<br/>

  O' steel, but shortest grace!<br/>

Ae grip o' yer han' afore ye gang!<br/>

  An' turn me upo' my face."<br/>
</p>

<p>But he's turnit himsel upon his heel,<br/>

  An' wordless awa he's gane;<br/>

An' the corbie-craw i' the aik abune<br/>

  Is roupin for his ain.<br/>
</p>

<h5>II.</h5>

<p>Lady Margaret, her hert richt gret,<br/>

  Luiks ower the castle wa';<br/>

Lord Archibold rides oot at the yett,<br/>

  Ahint him his merry men a'.<br/>
</p>

<p>Wi' a' his band, to the Holy Land<br/>

  He's boune wi' merry din,<br/>

His shouther's doss a Christ's cross,<br/>

  In his breist an ugsome sin.<br/>
</p>

<p>But the cross it brunt him like the fire.<br/>

  Its burnin never ceast;<br/>

It brunt in an' in, to win at the sin<br/>

  Lay cowerin in his breist.<br/>
</p>

<p>A mile frae the shore o' the Deid Sea<br/>

  The army haltit ae nicht;<br/>

Lord Archie was waukrife, an' oot gaed he<br/>

  A walkin i' the munelicht.<br/>
</p>

<p>Dour-like he gaed, wi' doon-hingin heid,<br/>

  Quhill he cam, by the licht o' the mune,<br/>

Quhaur michty stanes lay scattert like sheep,<br/>

  An' ance they worshipt Mahoun.<br/>
</p>

<p>The scruff an' scum o' the deid shore gleamt<br/>

  An' glintit a sauty gray;<br/>

The banes o' the deid stack oot o' its bed,<br/>

  The sea lickit them as they lay.<br/>
</p>

<p>He sat him doon on a sunken stane,<br/>

  An' he sighit sae dreary an' deep:<br/>

"I can thole ohn grutten, lyin awauk,<br/>

  But he comes whan I'm asleep!<br/>
</p>

<p>"I wud gie my soul for ever an' aye<br/>

  Intil en'less dule an' smert,<br/>

To sleep a' nicht like a bairn again,<br/>

  An' cule my burnin hert!"<br/>
</p>

<p>Oot frae ahint a muckle stane<br/>

  Cam a voice like a huddy craw's:<br/>

"Behaud there, Archibold Gordon!" it said,<br/>

  "Behaud—ye hae ower gude cause!"<br/>
</p>

<p>"I'll say quhat I like," quod Archibold,<br/>

  "Be ye ghaist or deevil or quhat!"<br/>

"Tak tent, lord Archie, gien ye be wise—<br/>

  The tit winna even the tat!"<br/>
</p>

<p>Lord Archibold leuch wi' a loud ha, ha,<br/>

  Eerisome, grousum to hear:<br/>

"A bonny bargain auld Cloots wad hae,<br/>

  It has ilka faut but fear!"<br/>
</p>

<p>"Dune, lord Archibold?" craikit the voice;<br/>

  "Dune, Belzie!" cried he again.—<br/>

The gray banes glimmert, the white saut shimmert—<br/>

  Lord Archie was him lane.<br/>
</p>

<p>Back he gaed straught, by the glowerin mune,<br/>

  An' doun in his plaid he lay,<br/>

An' soun' he sleepit.—A ghaist-like man<br/>

  Sat by his heid quhill the day.<br/>
</p>

<p>An' quhanever he moanit or turnit him roun,<br/>

  Or his broo gae token o' plycht,<br/>

The waukin man i' the sleepin man's lug<br/>

  Wud rown a murgeon o' micht.<br/>
</p>

<p>An' the glint o' a smile wud quaver athort<br/>

  The sleepin cheek sae broun,<br/>

An' a tear atween the ee-lids wud stert,<br/>

  An' whiles rin fairly doun.<br/>
</p>

<p>An' aye by his lair sat the ghaist-like man,<br/>

  He watchit his sleep a' nicht;<br/>

An' in mail rust-broun, wi' his visorne doun,<br/>

  Rade at his knee i' the fecht.<br/>
</p>

<p>Nor anis nor twyis the horn-helmit chiel<br/>

  Saved him frae deidly dad;<br/>

An' Archie said, "Gien this be the deil<br/>

  He's no sac black as he's ca'd."<br/>
</p>

<p>But wat ye fu' weel it wasna the deil<br/>

  That tuik lord Archie's pairt,<br/>

But his twin-brother John he thoucht deid an' gone,<br/>

  Wi' luve like a lowe in his hert.<br/>
</p>

<h5>III.</h5>

<p>Hame cam lord Archibold, weary wicht,<br/>

  Hame til his ain countree;<br/>

An' he cried, quhan his castle rase in sicht,<br/>

  "Noo Christ me sain an' see!"<br/>
</p>

<p>He turnit him roun: the man in rust-broun<br/>

  Was gane, he saw nocht quhair!<br/>

At the ha' door he lichtit him doun,<br/>

  Lady Margaret met him there.<br/>
</p>

<p>Reid, reid war her een, but hie was her mien,<br/>

  An' her words war sharp an' sair:<br/>

"Welcome, Archie, to dule an' tene,<br/>

  An' welcome ye s' get nae mair!<br/>
</p>

<p>Quhaur is yer twin, lord Archibold,<br/>

  That lay i' my body wi' thee?<br/>

I miss my mark gien he liesna stark<br/>

  Quhaur the daylicht comesna to see!"<br/>
</p>

<p>Lord Archibold dochtna speik a word<br/>

  For his hert was like a stane;<br/>

He turnt him awa—an' the huddy craw<br/>

  Was roupin for his ain.<br/>
</p>

<p>"Quhaur are ye gaein, lord Archie," she said,<br/>

  "Wi' yer lips sae white an' thin?"<br/>

"Mother, gude-bye! I'm gaein to lie<br/>

  Ance mair wi' my body-twin."<br/>
</p>

<p>Up she brade, but awa he gaed<br/>

  Straucht for the corbie-tree;<br/>

For quhaur he had slain he thoucht to slay,<br/>

  An' cast him doon an' dee.<br/>
</p>

<p>"God guide us!" he cried wi' gastit rair,<br/>

  "Has he lien there ever sin' syne?"<br/>

An' he thoucht he saw the banes, pykit an' bare,<br/>

  Throu the cracks o' his harness shine.<br/>
</p>

<p>"Oh Johnnie! my brither!" quo' Archibold<br/>

  Wi' a hert-upheavin mane,<br/>

"I wad pit my soul i' yer wastit corp<br/>

  To see ye alive again!"<br/>
</p>

<p>"Haud ye there!" quod a voice frae oot the helm,<br/>

  "A man suld heed quhat he says!"<br/>

An' the closin joints grippit an' tore the gerse<br/>

As up the armour rase:—<br/>
</p>

<p>"Soul ye hae nane to ca' yer ain<br/>

  An' its time to hand yer jaw!<br/>

The sleep it was thine, an' the soul it is mine:<br/>

  Deil Archie, come awa!"<br/>
</p>

<p>"Auld Hornie," quo' Archie, "twa words to that:<br/>

  My burnin hert burns on;<br/>

An' the sleep, weel I wat, was nae reek frae thy pat,<br/>

  For aye I was dreamin o' John!<br/>
</p>

<p>"But I carena a plack for a soul sae black—<br/>

  Wae's me 'at my mither bore me!<br/>

Put fire i' my breist an' fire at my back,<br/>

  But ae minute set Johnnie afore me!"<br/>
</p>

<p>The gantlets grippit the helm sae stoot<br/>

  An' liftit frae chin an' broo:<br/>

An' Johnnie himsel keekit smilin oot:—<br/>

  "O Archie, I hae ye noo!<br/>
</p>

<p>"O' yer wee bit brod I was little the waur,<br/>

  I crap awa my lane;<br/>

An' never a deevil cam ye nar,<br/>

  'Cep ye coont yer Johnnie ane!"<br/>
</p>

<p>Quhare quhylum his brither Johnnie lay,<br/>

  Fell Archie upon his knees;<br/>

The words he said I dinna say,<br/>

  But I'm sure they warna lees.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-last-wooin" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Last Wooin</h2>
<p>"O lat me in, my bonny lass!<br/>

  It's a lang road ower the hill,<br/>

And the flauchterin snaw begud to fa'<br/>

  On the brig ayont the mill!"<br/>
</p>

<p>"Here's nae change-hoose, John Munro!"<br/>

  "I'll ken that to my cost<br/>

Gien ye gar me tak the hill the nicht,<br/>

  Wi' snaw o' the back o' frost!<br/>
</p>

<p>But tell me, lass, what's my offence."<br/>

  "Weel ken ye! At the fair<br/>

Ye lichtlied me! Ay, twasna ance!—<br/>

  Ye needna come nae mair!"<br/>
</p>

<p>"I lichtlied ye?"—"Ay, ower the glass!"<br/>

  "Foul-fa' the ill-faured mou<br/>

'At made the leein word to pass<br/>

  By rowin 't i' the true!<br/>
</p>

<p>The trouth is this: I dochtna bide<br/>

  To hear yer bonnie name<br/>

Whaur lawless mous war openit wide<br/>

  Wi' ill-tongued scoff and blame;<br/>
</p>

<p>And what I said was: 'Hoot, lat sit!<br/>

  She's but a bairn, the lass!'<br/>

It turnt the spait o' words a bit,<br/>

  And loot yer fair name pass."<br/>
</p>

<p>"Thank ye for naething, John Munro!<br/>

  My name it needna hide;<br/>

It's no a drucken sough wud gar<br/>

  Me turn my heid aside!"<br/>
</p>

<p>"O Elsie, lassie, be yersel!<br/>

  The snaw-stour's driftin thrang!<br/>

O tak me in, the win' 's sae snell,<br/>

  And in an hour I'll gang."<br/>
</p>

<p>"I downa pay ye guid for ill,<br/>

  Ye heedna fause and true!<br/>

Gang back to Katie at the mill—<br/>

  She loos sic like as you!"<br/>
</p>

<p>He turnt his fit; she heardna mair.<br/>

  The lift was like to fa';<br/>

And Elsie's hert grew grit and sair<br/>

  At sicht o' the drivin snaw.<br/>
</p>

<p>She laid her doon, but no to sleep,<br/>

  Her verra hert was cauld;<br/>

And the sheets war like a frozen heap<br/>

  O' drift aboot her faul'd.<br/>
</p>

<p>She rase fu' air; the warl lay fair<br/>

  And still in its windin-sheet;<br/>

At door-cheek, or at winnock-lug,<br/>

  Was never a mark o' feet!<br/>
</p>

<p>She crap for days aboot the hoose,<br/>

  Dull-futtit and hert-sair,<br/>

Aye keekin oot like a hungert moose—<br/>

  But Johnnie was na there!<br/>
</p>

<p>Lang or the spring begoud to thow<br/>

  The waesome, sick-faced snaw,<br/>

Her hert was saft a' throu and throu,<br/>

  Her pride had ta'en a fa'.<br/>
</p>

<p>And whan the wreaths war halflins gane,<br/>

  And the sun was blinkin bonnie,<br/>

Oot ower the hill she wud gang her lane<br/>

  To speir aboot her Johnnie.<br/>
</p>

<p>Half ower, she cam intil a lair<br/>

  O' snaw and slush and weet:<br/>

The Lord hae mercy! what's that there?<br/>

  It was Johnnie at her feet.<br/>
</p>

<p>Aneth the snaw his heid was smorit,<br/>

  But his breist was maistly bare,<br/>

And twixt his richt ban' and his hert<br/>

  Lay a lock o' gouden hair.<br/>
</p>

<p>The warm win' blew, the blackcock flew,<br/>

  The lerrick muntit the skies;<br/>

The burnie ran, and a baein began,<br/>

  But Johnnie wudna rise.<br/>
</p>

<p>The sun was clear, the lift was blue,<br/>

  The winter was awa;<br/>

Up cam the green gerse plentifu,<br/>

  The better for the snaw;<br/>
</p>

<p>And warm it happit Johnnie's grave<br/>

  Whaur the ae lock gouden lay;<br/>

But on Elsie's hingin heid the lave<br/>

  Was afore the barley gray.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="time-and-tide" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Time and Tide</h2>
<p>  As I was walkin on the strand,<br/>

    I spied ane auld man sit<br/>

  On ane auld black rock; and aye the waves<br/>

    Cam washin up its fit.<br/>

  His lips they gaed as gien they wad lilt,<br/>

    But o' liltin, wae's me, was nane!<br/>

  He spak but an owercome, dreary and dreigh,<br/>

    A burden wha's sang was gane:<br/>

"Robbie and Jeanie war twa bonnie bairns;<br/>

  They playt thegither i' the gloamin's hush:<br/>

Up cam the tide and the mune and the sterns,<br/>

  And pairtit the twa wi' a glint and a gush."<br/>
</p>

<p>  "What can the auld man mean," quod I,<br/>

    "Sittin o' the auld black rock?<br/>

  The tide creeps up wi' a moan and a cry,<br/>

    And a hiss 'maist like a mock!<br/>

  The words he mutters maun be the en'<br/>

    O' some weary auld-warl' sang—<br/>

  A deid thing floatin aboot in his brain,<br/>

    'At the tide 'ill no lat gang!"<br/>

"Robbie and Jeanie war twa bonnie bairns;<br/>

  They playt thegither i' the gloamin's hush:<br/>

Up cam the tide and the mune and the sterns,<br/>

  And pairtit the twa wi' a glint and a gush."<br/>
</p>

<p>  "Hoo pairtit it them, auld man?" I said;<br/>

    "Was't the sea cam up ower strang?<br/>

  Oh, gien thegither the twa o' them gaed<br/>

    Their pairtin wasna lang!<br/>

  Or was are ta'en, and the ither left—<br/>

    Ane to sing, are to greit?<br/>

  It's sair, I ken, to be sae bereft—<br/>

    But there's the tide at yer feet!"<br/>

"Robbie and Jeanie war twa bonnie bairns,<br/>

  And they playt thegither i' the gloamin's hush:<br/>

Up cam the tide and the mune and the sterns,<br/>

  And pairtit the twa wi' a glint and a gush."<br/>
</p>

<p>  "Was't the sea o' space wi' its storm o' time<br/>

    That wadna lat things bide?<br/>

  But Death's a diver frae heavenly clime<br/>

    Seekin ye neth its tide,<br/>

  And ye'll gaze again in ither's ee,<br/>

    Far abune space and time!"<br/>

  Never ae word he answered me,<br/>

    But changed a wee his rime:<br/>

"Robbie and Jeanie war twa bonnie bairns,<br/>

  And they playt thegither upo' the shore;<br/>

Up cam the tide and the mune and the sterns,<br/>

  And pairtit the twa for evermore."<br/>
</p>

<p>  "May be, auld man, 'twas the tide o' change<br/>

    That crap atween the twa?<br/>

  Hech! that's a droonin fearsome strange,<br/>

    Waur, waur nor are and a'!"<br/>

  He said nae mair. I luikit, and saw<br/>

    His lips they couldna gang:<br/>

  Death, the diver, had ta'en him awa,<br/>

    To gie him a new auld sang.<br/>

Robbie and Jeanie war twa bonnie bairns,<br/>

  And they playt thegither upo' the shore:<br/>

Up cam the tide and the mune and the sterns,<br/>

  And souft them awa throu a mirksome door!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="halloween" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Halloween</h2>
<p>Sweep up the flure, Janet;<br/>

  Put on anither peat.<br/>

It's a lown and a starry nicht, Janet,<br/>

  And nowther cauld nor weet.<br/>
</p>

<p>It's the nicht atween the Sancts and Souls<br/>

  Whan the bodiless gang aboot;<br/>

And it's open hoose we keep the nicht<br/>

  For ony that may be oot.<br/>
</p>

<p>Set the cheirs back to the wa', Janet;<br/>

  Mak ready for quaiet fowk.<br/>

Hae a'thing as clean as a windin-sheet:<br/>

  They comena ilka ook.<br/>
</p>

<p>There's a spale upo' the flure, Janet,<br/>

  And there's a rowan-berry!<br/>

Sweep them intil the fire, Janet,<br/>

  Or they'll neither come nor tarry.<br/>
</p>

<p>Syne set open the outer dure—<br/>

  Wide open for wha kens wha?<br/>

As ye come ben to your bed, Janet,<br/>

  Set baith dures to the wa'.<br/>
</p>

<p>She set the cheirs back to the wa',<br/>

  But ane that was o' the birk;<br/>

She sweepit the flure, but left the spale—<br/>

  A lang spale o' the aik.<br/>
</p>

<p>The nicht was lown; the stars sae still<br/>

  War glintin doon the sky;<br/>

The souls crap oot o' their mooly graves,<br/>

  A' dank wi' lyin by.<br/>
</p>

<p>They faund the dure wide to the wa',<br/>

  And the peats blawn rosy reid:<br/>

They war shuneless feet gaed in and oot,<br/>

  Nor clampit as they gaed.<br/>
</p>

<p>The mither she keekit but the hoose,<br/>

  Saw what she ill could say;<br/>

Quakin she slidit doon by Janet,<br/>

  And gaspin a whilie she lay.<br/>
</p>

<p>There's are o' them sittin afore the fire!<br/>

  Ye wudna hearken to me!<br/>

Janet, ye left a cheir by the fire,<br/>

  Whaur I tauld ye nae cheir suld be!<br/>
</p>

<p>Janet she smilit in her minnie's face:<br/>

  She had brunt the roden reid,<br/>

But she left aneth the birken cheir<br/>

  The spale frae a coffin-lid!<br/>
</p>

<p>Saft she rase and gaed but the hoose,<br/>

  And ilka dure did steik.<br/>

Three hours gaed by, and her minnie heard<br/>

  Sound o' the deid nor quick.<br/>
</p>

<p>Whan the gray cock crew, she heard on the flure<br/>

  The fa' o' shuneless feet;<br/>

Whan the rud cock crew, she heard the dure,<br/>

  And a sough o' win' and weet.<br/>
</p>

<p>Whan the goud cock crew, Janet cam back;<br/>

  Her face it was gray o' ble;<br/>

Wi' starin een, at her mither's side<br/>

  She lay doon like a bairn to dee.<br/>
</p>

<p>Her white lips hadna a word to lat fa'<br/>

  Mair nor the soulless deid;<br/>

Seven lang days and nights she lay,<br/>

  And never a word she said.<br/>
</p>

<p>Syne suddent, as oot o' a sleep, she brade,<br/>

  Smilin richt winsumly;<br/>

And she spak, but her word it was far and strayit,<br/>

  Like a whisper come ower the sea.<br/>
</p>

<p>And never again did they hear her lauch,<br/>

  Nor ever a tear doun ran;<br/>

But a smile aye flittit aboot her face<br/>

  Like the mune on a water wan.<br/>
</p>

<p>And ilka nicht atween Sancts and Souls<br/>

  She laid the dures to the wa',<br/>

Blew up the fire, and set the cheir,<br/>

  And loot the spale doon fa'.<br/>
</p>

<p>And at midnicht she gaed but the hoose<br/>

  Aye steekin dure and dure.<br/>

Whan the goud cock crew, quaiet as a moose<br/>

  She cam creepin ower the flure.<br/>
</p>

<p>Mair wan grew her face, and her smile mair sweet<br/>

  Quhill the seventh Halloweve:<br/>

Her mother she heard the shuneless feet,<br/>

  Said—She'll be ben belyve!<br/>
</p>

<p>She camna ben. Her minnie rase—<br/>

  For fear she 'maist cudna stan;<br/>

She grippit the wa', and but she gaed,<br/>

  For the goud cock lang had crawn.<br/>
</p>

<p>There sat Janet upo' the birk cheir,<br/>

  White as the day did daw;<br/>

But her smile was a sunglint left on the sea<br/>

  Whan the sun himsel is awa.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-lady-noel-byron" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To Lady Noel Byron</h2>
<p>  Men sought, ambition's thirst to slake,<br/>

    The lost elixir old<br/>

  Whose magic touch should instant make<br/>

    The meaner metals gold.<br/>
</p>

<p>  A nobler alchymy is thine<br/>

    Which love from pain doth press:<br/>

  Gold in thy hand becomes divine,<br/>

    Grows truth and tenderness.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-garibaldi-with-a-book" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To Garibaldi, with a Book</h2>
<p>  When at Philippi, he who would have freed<br/>

  Great Rome from tyrants, for the season brief<br/>

  That lay 'twixt him and battle, sought relief<br/>

  From painful thoughts, he in a book did read,<br/>

  That so the death of Portia might not breed<br/>

  Unmanful thoughts, and cloud his mind with grief:<br/>

  Brother of Brutus, of high hearts the chief,<br/>

  When thou at length receiv'st thy heavenly meed,<br/>

  And I have found my hoping not in vain,<br/>

  Tell me my book has wiled away one pang<br/>

  That out of some lone sacred memory sprang,<br/>

  Or wrought an hour's forgetfulness of pain,<br/>

  And I shall rise, my heart brimful of gain,<br/>

  And thank my God amid the golden clang.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-the-same" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To the Same</h2>
<p>  Dead, why defend thee, who in life<br/>

    For thy worst foe hadst died;<br/>

  Who, thy own name a word of strife,<br/>

    Didst silent stand aside?<br/>
</p>

<p>  Grand in forgiveness, what to thee<br/>

    The big world's puny prate!<br/>

  Or thy great heart hath ceased to be<br/>

    Or loveth still its mate!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-holy-midnight" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Holy Midnight</h2>
<p>  Ah, holy midnight of the soul,<br/>

      When stars alone are high;<br/>

  When winds are resting at their goal,<br/>

      And sea-waves only sigh!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Ambition faints from out the will;<br/>

      Asleep sad longing lies;<br/>

  All hope of good, all fear of ill,<br/>

      All need of action dies;<br/>
</p>

<p>  Because God is, and claims the life<br/>

      He kindled in thy brain;<br/>

  And thou in him, rapt far from strife,<br/>

      Diest and liv'st again.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="hard-times" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Hard Times</h2>
<p>  I am weary, and very lonely,<br/>

      And can but think—think.<br/>

  If there were some water only<br/>

      That a spirit might drink—drink,<br/>

        And arise,<br/>

        With light in the eyes<br/>

  And a crown of hope on the brow,<br/>

      To walk abroad in the strength of gladness,<br/>

      Not sit in the house, benumbed with sadness—<br/>

        As now!<br/>
</p>

<p>  But, Lord, thy child will be sad—<br/>

      As sad as it pleases thee;<br/>

  Will sit, not seeking to be glad,<br/>

      Till thou bid sadness flee,<br/>

        And, drawing near,<br/>

        With thy good cheer<br/>

      Awake thy life in me.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="summer-song" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Summer Song</h2>
<pMurmuring, 'twixt a murmur and moan,<br/>

  Many a tune in a single tone,<br/>

  For every ear with a secret true—<br/>

  The sea-shell wants to whisper to you."<br/>
</p>

<p>  "Yes—I hear it—far and faint,<br/>

  Like thin-drawn prayer of drowsy saint;<br/>

  Like the muffled sounds of a summer rain;<br/>

  Like the wash of dreams in a weary brain."<br/>
</p>

<p>  "By smiling lip and fixed eye,<br/>

  You are hearing a song within the sigh:<br/>

  The murmurer has many a lovely phrase—<br/>

  Tell me, darling, the words it says."<br/>
</p>

<p>  "I hear a wind on a boatless main<br/>

  Sigh like the last of a vanishing pain;<br/>

  On the dreaming waters dreams the moon—<br/>

  But I hear no words in the doubtful tune."<br/>
</p>

<p>  "If it tell thee not that I love thee well,<br/>

  'Tis a senseless, wrinkled, ill-curved shell:<br/>

  If it be not of love, why sigh or sing?<br/>

  'Tis a common, mechanical, stupid thing!"<br/>
</p>

<p>  "It murmurs, it whispers, with prophet voice<br/>

  Of a peace that comes, of a sealed choice;<br/>

  It says not a word of your love to me,<br/>

  But it tells me I love you eternally."<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="picture-songs" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Picture Songs</h2>
<h4>  I.</h4>

<p>  A pale green sky is gleaming;<br/>

    The steely stars are few;<br/>

  The moorland pond is steaming<br/>

    A mist of gray and blue.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Along the pathway lonely<br/>

    My horse is walking slow;<br/>

  Three living creatures only,<br/>

    He, I, and a home-bound crow!<br/>
</p>

<p>  The moon is hardly shaping<br/>

    Her circle in the fog;<br/>

  A dumb stream is escaping<br/>

    Its prison in the bog.<br/>
</p>

<p>  But in my heart are ringing<br/>

    Tones of a lofty song;<br/>

  A voice that I know, is singing,<br/>

    And my heart all night must long.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  II.</h4>

<p>  Over a shining land—<br/>

    Once such a land I knew—<br/>

  Over its sea, by a soft wind fanned,<br/>

    The sky is all white and blue.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The waves are kissing the shores,<br/>

    Murmuring love and for ever;<br/>

  A boat gleams green, and its timeful oars<br/>

    Flash out of the level river.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Oh to be there with thee<br/>

    And the sun, on wet sands, my love!<br/>

  With the shining river, the sparkling sea,<br/>

    And the radiant sky above!<br/>
</p>

<h4>  III.</h4>

<p>  The autumn winds are sighing<br/>

    Over land and sea;<br/>

  The autumn woods are dying<br/>

    Over hill and lea;<br/>

  And my heart is sighing, dying,<br/>

    Maiden, for thee.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The autumn clouds are flying<br/>

    Homeless over me;<br/>

  The nestless birds are crying<br/>

    In the naked tree;<br/>

  And my heart is flying, crying,<br/>

    Maiden, to thee.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The autumn sea is crawling<br/>

    Up the chilly shore;<br/>

  The thin-voiced firs are calling<br/>

    Ghostily evermore:<br/>

  Maiden, maiden! I am falling<br/>

    Dead at thy door.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  IV.</h4>

<p>  The waters are rising and flowing<br/>

    Over the weedy stone—<br/>

  Over it, over it going:<br/>

    It is never gone.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Waves upon waves of weeping<br/>

    Went over the ancient pain;<br/>

  Glad waves go over it leaping—<br/>

    Still it rises again!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-dream-song" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Dream Song</h2>
<p>  I dreamed of a song—I heard it sung;<br/>

  In the ear of my soul its strange notes rung.<br/>

  What were its words I could not tell,<br/>

  Only the voice I heard right well,<br/>

  For its tones unearthly my spirit bound<br/>

  In a calm delirium of mystic sound—<br/>

  Held me floating, alone and high,<br/>

  Placeless and silent, drinking my fill<br/>

  Of dews that from cloudless skies distil<br/>

  On desert places that thirst and sigh.<br/>

  'Twas a woman's voice, deep calling to deep,<br/>

  Rousing old echoes that all day sleep<br/>

  In cavern and solitude, each apart,<br/>

  Here and there in the waiting heart;—<br/>

  A voice with a wild melodious cry<br/>

  Reaching and longing afar and high.<br/>

  Sorrowful triumph, and hopeful strife,<br/>

  Gainful death, and new-born life,<br/>

  Thrilled in each note of the prophet-song.<br/>

  In my heart it said: O Lord, how long<br/>

  Shall we groan and travail and faint and pray,<br/>

  Ere thy lovely kingdom bring the day!<br/>
</p>

<p>1842.</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-manchester-poem" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Manchester Poem</h2>
<p>  'Tis a poor drizzly morning, dark and sad.<br/>

  The cloud has fallen, and filled with fold on fold<br/>

  The chimneyed city; and the smoke is caught,<br/>

  And spreads diluted in the cloud, and sinks,<br/>

  A black precipitate, on miry streets.<br/>

  And faces gray glide through the darkened fog.<br/>
</p>

<p>    Slave engines utter again their ugly growl,<br/>

  And soon the iron bands and blocks of stone<br/>

  That prison them to their task, will strain and quiver<br/>

  Until the city tremble. The clamour of bells,<br/>

  Importunate, keeps calling pale-faced forms<br/>

  To gather and feed those Samsons' groaning strength<br/>

  With labour; and among the many come<br/>

  A man and woman—the woman with her gown<br/>

  Drawn over her head, the man with bended neck<br/>

  Submissive to the rain. Amid the jar,<br/>

  And clash, and shudder of the awful force,<br/>

  They enter and part—each to a different task,<br/>

  But each a soul of knowledge to brute force,<br/>

  Working a will through the organized whole<br/>

  Of cranks and belts and levers, pinions and screws<br/>

  Wherewith small man has eked his body out,<br/>

  And made himself a mighty, weary giant.<br/>

    In labour close they pass the murky day,<br/>

  'Mid floating dust of swift-revolving wheels,<br/>

  And filmy spoil of quick contorted threads,<br/>

  Which weave a sultry chaos all about;<br/>

  Until, at length, old darkness, swelling slow<br/>

  Up from the caves of night to make an end,<br/>

  Chokes in its tide the clanking of the looms,<br/>

  The monster-engines, and the flying gear.<br/>

  'Tis Earth that draws her curtains, and calls home<br/>

  Her little ones, and sets her down to nurse<br/>

  Her tired children—like a mother-ghost<br/>

  With her neglected darlings in the dark.<br/>

  So out they walk, with sense of glad release,<br/>

  And home—to a dreary place! Unfinished walls,<br/>

  Earth-heaps, and broken bricks, and muddy pools<br/>

  Lie round it like a rampart against the spring,<br/>

  The summer, and all sieges of the year.<br/>
</p>

<p>    But, Lo, the dark has opened an eye of fire!<br/>

  The room reveals a temple, witnessed by signs<br/>

  Seen in the ancient place! Lo, here is light,<br/>

  Yea, burning fire, with darkness on its skirts;<br/>

  Pure water, ready to baptize; and bread;<br/>

  And in the twilight edges of the light,<br/>

  A book; and, for the cunning-woven veil,<br/>

  Their faces—hiding God's own holiest place!<br/>

  Even their bed figures the would-be grave<br/>

  Where One arose triumphant, slept no more!<br/>

  So at their altar-table they sit down<br/>

  To eat their Eucharist; for, to the heart<br/>

  That reads the live will in the dead command,<br/>

  <i>He</i> is the bread, yea, all of every meal.<br/>

    But as, in weary rest, they silent sit,<br/>

  They gradually grow aware of light<br/>

  That overcomes their lamp, and, through the blind,<br/>

  Casts from the window-frame two shadow-glooms<br/>

  That make a cross of darkness on the white.<br/>

  The woman rises, eagerly looks out:<br/>

  Lo, some fair wind has mown the earth-sprung fog,<br/>

  And, far aloft, the white exultant moon,<br/>

  From her blue window, curtained all with white,<br/>

  Looks greeting them—God's creatures they and she!<br/>

  Smiling she turns; he understands the smile:<br/>

  To-morrow will be fair—as holy, fair!<br/>

  And lying down, in sleep they die till morn,<br/>

  While through their night throb low aurora-gleams<br/>

  Of resurrection and the coming dawn.<br/>

  They wake: 'tis Sunday. Still the moon is there,<br/>

  But thin and ghostly—clothed upon with light,<br/>

  As if, while they were sleeping, she had died.<br/>

  They dress themselves, like priests, in clean attire,<br/>

  And, through their lowly door, enter God's room.<br/>

    The sun is up, the emblem on his shield.<br/>

  One side the street, the windows all are moons<br/>

  To light the other side that lies in shade.<br/>

  See, down the sun-side, an old woman come<br/>

  In a red cloak that makes the whole street glad!<br/>

  A long-belated autumn-flower she seems,<br/>

  Dazed by the rushing of the new-born life<br/>

  Up hidden stairs to see the calling sun,<br/>

  But in her cloak and smile they know the spring,<br/>

  And haste to meet her through slow dissolving streets<br/>

  Widening to larger glimmers of growing green.<br/>

  Oh, far away the streets repel the spring!<br/>

  Yet every stone in the dull pavement shares<br/>

  The life that thrills anew the outworn earth,<br/>

  A right Bethesda angel—for all, not some!<br/>
</p>

<p>    A street unfinished leads them forth at length<br/>

  Where green fields bask, and hedgerow trees, apart,<br/>

  Stand waiting in the air as for some good,<br/>

  And the sky is broad and blue—and there is all!<br/>

  No peaceful river meditates along<br/>

  The weary flat to the less level sea!<br/>

  No forest brown, on pillared stems, its boughs<br/>

  Meeting in gothic arches, bears aloft<br/>

  A groined vault, fretted with tremulous leaves!<br/>

  No mountains lift their snows, and send their brooks<br/>

  Down babbling with the news of silent things!<br/>

  But love itself is commonest of all,<br/>

  And loveliest of all, in all the worlds!<br/>

  And he that hath not forest, brook, or hill,<br/>

  Must learn to read aright what commoner books<br/>

  Unfold before him. If ocean solitudes—<br/>

  Then darkness dashed with glory, infinite shades,<br/>

  And misty minglings of the sea and sky.<br/>

  If only fields—the humble man of heart<br/>

  Will revel in the grass beneath his foot,<br/>

  And from the lea lift his glad eye to heaven,<br/>

  God's palette, where his careless painter-hand<br/>

  Sweeps comet-clouds that net the gazing soul;<br/>

  Streaks endless stairs, and blots half-sculptured blocks;<br/>

  Curves filmy pallors; heaps huge mountain-crags;<br/>

  Nor touches where it leaves not beauty's mark.<br/>

    To them the sun and air are feast enough,<br/>

  As through field-paths and lanes they slowly walk;<br/>

  But sometimes, on the far horizon dim<br/>

  A veil is lifted, and they spy the hills,<br/>

  Cloudlike and faint, yet sharp against the sky;<br/>

  Then wakes an unknown want, which asks and looks<br/>

  As for some thing forgot—loved long ago,<br/>

  But on the hither verge of childhood dropt:<br/>

  'Tis but home-sickness roused in the soul by Spring!<br/>

  Fresh birth and eager growth, reviving life,<br/>

  Which <i>is</i> because it <i>would be</i>, fill the world;<br/>

  The very light is new-born with the grass;<br/>

  The stones themselves are warm; the brown earth swells,<br/>

  Filled, sponge-like, with dark beams, which nestle close<br/>

  And brood unseen and shy, and potent warm<br/>

  In every little corner, nest, and crack<br/>

  Where buried lurks a blind and sleepy seed<br/>

  Waiting the touch of the finger of the sun.<br/>

  The mossy stems and boughs, where yet no life<br/>

  Oozes exuberant in brown and green,<br/>

  Are clad in golden splendours, crossed and lined<br/>

  With shuttle-shadows weaving lovely change.<br/>

  Through the tree-tops the west wind rushing goes,<br/>

  Calling and rousing the dull sap within:<br/>

  The fine jar down the stem sinks tremulous,<br/>

  From airy root thrilling to earthy branch.<br/>

  And though as yet no buddy baby dots<br/>

  Sparkle the darkness of the hedgerow twigs,<br/>

  The smoke-dried bark appears to spread and swell<br/>

  In the soft nurture of the warm light-bath.<br/>

    The sun had left behind him the keystone<br/>

  Of his low arch half-way when they turned home,<br/>

  Filled with pure air, and light, and operant spring:<br/>

  Back, like the bees, they went to their dark house<br/>

  To store their innocent spoil in honeyed thought.<br/>
</p>

<p>    But on their way, crossing a field, they chanced<br/>

  Upon a spot where once had been a home,<br/>

  And roots of walls still peered out, grown with moss.<br/>

  'Twas a dead cottage, mouldered quite, where yet<br/>

  Lay the old shadow of a vanished care;<br/>

  The little garden's blunt, half-blotted map<br/>

  Was yet discernible by thinner grass<br/>

  Upon the walks. There, in the midst of dry<br/>

  Bushes, dead flowers, rampant, uncomely weeds,<br/>

  A single snowdrop drooped its snowy drop,<br/>

  The lonely remnant of a family<br/>

  That in the garden dwelt about the home—<br/>

  Reviving with the spring when home was gone:<br/>

  They see; its spiritual counterpart<br/>

  Wakes up and blossoms white in their meek souls—<br/>

  A longing, patient, waiting hopefulness,<br/>

  The snowdrop of the heart; a heavenly child,<br/>

  That, pale with the earthly cold, hangs its fair head<br/>

  As it had nought to say 'gainst any world;<br/>

  While they in whom it dwells, nor knows itself,<br/>

  Inherit in their meekness all the worlds.<br/>
</p>

<p>    I love thee, flower, as a slow lingerer<br/>

  Upon the verge of my humanity.<br/>

  Lo, on thine inner leaves and in thy heart<br/>

  The loveliest green, acknowledging the grass—<br/>

  White-minded memory of lowly friends!<br/>

  But almost more I love thee for the earth<br/>

  Which clings to thy transfigured radiancy,<br/>

  Uplifted with thee from thine abandoned grave;<br/>

  Say rather the soiling of thy garments pure<br/>

  Upon thy road into the light and air,<br/>

  The heaven of thy new birth. Some gentle rain<br/>

  Will one day wash thee white, and send the earth<br/>

  Back to the earth; but, sweet friend, while it clings,<br/>

  I love the cognizance of our family.<br/>
</p>

<p>    With careful hands uprooting it, they bore<br/>

  The little plant a willing captive home—<br/>

  Fearless of dark abode, because secure<br/>

  In its own tale of light. As once of old<br/>

  The angel of the annunciation shone,<br/>

  Bearing all heaven into a common house,<br/>

  It brings in with it field and sky and air.<br/>

  A pot of mould its one poor tie to earth,<br/>

  Its heaven an ell of blue 'twixt chimney-tops,<br/>

  Its world the priests of that small temple-room,<br/>

  It takes its prophet-place with fire and book,<br/>

  Type of primeval spring, whose mighty arc<br/>

  Hath not yet drawn the summer up the sky.<br/>

  At night, when the dark shadow of the cross<br/>

  Will enter, clothed in moonlight, still and wan<br/>

  Like a pale mourner at its foot the flower<br/>

  Will, drooping, wait the dawn. Then the dark bird<br/>

  Which holds breast-caged the secret of the sun,<br/>

  And therefore hangs himself a prisoner caged,<br/>

  Will break into its song—Lo, God is light!<br/>
</p>

<p>    Weary and hopeful, to their sleep they go;<br/>

  And all night long the snowdrop glimmers white<br/>

  Thinning the dark, unknowing it, and unseen.<br/>
</p>

<p>       *       *       *       *       *</p>

<p>    Out of my verse I woke, and saw my room,<br/>

  My precious books, the cherub-forms above,<br/>

  And rose, and walked abroad, and sought the woods;<br/>

  And roving odours met me on my way.<br/>

    I entered Nature's church, a shimmering vault<br/>

  Of boughs, and clouded leaves—filmy and pale<br/>

  Betwixt me and the sun, while at my feet<br/>

  Their shadows, dark and seeming solid, lay<br/>

  Like tombstones o'er the vanished flowers of Spring.<br/>

  The place was silent, save for the broken song<br/>

  Of some Memnonian, glory-stricken bird<br/>

  That burst into a carol and was still;<br/>

  It was not lonely: golden beetles crept,<br/>

  Green goblins, in the roots; and squirrel things<br/>

  Ran, wild as cherubs, through the tracery;<br/>

  And here and yonder a flaky butterfly<br/>

  Was doubting in the air, scarlet and blue.<br/>

    But 'twixt my heart and summer's perfect grace,<br/>

  Drove a dividing wedge, and far away<br/>

  It seemed, like voice heard loud yet far away<br/>

  By one who, waking half, soon sleeps outright:—<br/>

  Where was the snowdrop? where the flower of hope?<br/>

  In me the spring was throbbing; round me lay<br/>

  Resting fulfilled, the odour-breathing summer!<br/>

  My heart heaved swelling like a prisoned bud,<br/>

  And summer crushed it with its weight of light!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Winter is full of stings and sharp reproofs,<br/>

  Healthsome, not hurtful, but yet hurting sore;<br/>

  Summer is too complete for growing hearts—<br/>

  Too idle its noons, its morns too triumphing,<br/>

  Too full of slumberous dreams its dusky eves;<br/>

  Autumn is full of ripeness and the grave;<br/>

  We need a broken season, where the cloud<br/>

  Is ruffled into glory, and the dark<br/>

  Falls rainful o'er the sunset; need a world<br/>

  Whose shadows ever point away from it;<br/>

  A scheme of cones abrupt, and flattened spheres,<br/>

  And circles cut, and perfect laws the while<br/>

  That marvellous imperfection ever points<br/>

  To higher perfectness than heart can think;<br/>

  Therefore to us, a flower of harassed Spring,<br/>

  Crocus, or primrose, or anemone,<br/>

  Is lovely as was never rosiest rose;<br/>

  A heath-bell on a waste, lonely and dry,<br/>

  Says more than lily, stately in breathing white;<br/>

  A window through a vaulted roof of rain<br/>

  Lets in a light that comes from farther away,<br/>

  And, sinking deeper, spreads a finer joy<br/>

  Than cloudless noon-tide splendorous o'er the world:<br/>

  Man seeks a better home than Paradise;<br/>

  Therefore high hope is more than deepest joy,<br/>

  A disappointment better than a feast,<br/>

  And the first daisy on a wind-swept lea<br/>

  Dearer than Eden-groves with rivers four.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="riddles" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Riddles</h2>
<h5>I.</h5>

<p>I have only one foot, but thousands of toes;<br/>

My one foot stands well, but never goes;<br/>

I've a good many arms, if you count them all,<br/>

But hundreds of fingers, large and small;<br/>

From the ends of my fingers my beauty grows;<br/>

I breathe with my hair, and I drink with my toes;<br/>

I grow bigger and bigger about the waist<br/>

Although I am always very tight laced;<br/>

None e'er saw me eat—I've no mouth to bite!<br/>

Yet I eat all day, and digest all night.<br/>

In the summer, with song I shake and quiver,<br/>

But in winter I fast and groan and shiver.<br/>
</p>

<h5>II.</h5>

<p>There is a plough that hath no share,<br/>

Only a coulter that parteth fair;<br/>

  But the ridges they rise<br/>

  To a terrible size<br/>

Or ever the coulter comes near to tear:<br/>

The horses and ridges fierce battle make;<br/>

The horses are safe, but the plough may break.<br/>
</p>

<p>Seed cast in its furrows, or green or sear,<br/>

Will lift to the sun neither blade nor ear:<br/>

  Down it drops plumb<br/>

  Where no spring-times come,<br/>

Nor needeth it any harrowing gear;<br/>

Wheat nor poppy nor blade has been found<br/>

Able to grow on the naked ground.<br/>
</p>

<h5>FOR MY GRANDCHILD.</h5>

<h5>III.</h5>

<p>Who is it that sleeps like a top all night,<br/>

And wakes in the morning so fresh and bright<br/>

That he breaks his bed as he gets up,<br/>

And leaves it smashed like a china cup?<br/>
</p>

<h5>IV.</h5>

<p>I've a very long nose, but what of that?<br/>

It is not too long to lie on a mat!<br/>
</p>

<p>I have very big jaws, but never get fat:<br/>

I don't go to church, and I'm not a church rat!<br/>
</p>

<p>I've a mouth in my middle my food goes in at,<br/>

Just like a skate's—that's a fish that's a flat.<br/>
</p>

<p>In summer I'm seldom able to breathe,<br/>

But when winter his blades in ice doth sheathe<br/>
</p>

<p>I swell my one lung, I look big and I puff,<br/>

And I sometimes hiss.—There, that's enough!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="baby" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Baby</h2>
<p>Where did you come from, baby dear?<br/>

Out of the everywhere into here.<br/>
</p>

<p>Where did you get those eyes so blue?<br/>

Out of the sky as I came through.<br/>
</p>

<p>What makes the light in them sparkle and spin?<br/>

Some of the starry twinkles left in.<br/>
</p>

<p>Where did you get that little tear?<br/>

I found it waiting when I got here.<br/>
</p>

<p>What makes your forehead so smooth and high?<br/>

A soft hand stroked it as I went by.<br/>
</p>

<p>What makes your cheek like a warm white rose?<br/>

I saw something better than any one knows.<br/>
</p>

<p>Whence that three-cornered smile of bliss?<br/>

Three angels gave me at once a kiss.<br/>
</p>

<p>Where did you get this pearly ear?<br/>

God spoke, and it came out to hear.<br/>
</p>

<p>Where did you get those arms and hands?<br/>

Love made itself into bonds and bands.<br/>
</p>

<p>Feet, whence did you come, you darling things?<br/>

From the same box as the cherubs' wings.<br/>
</p>

<p>How did they all just come to be you?<br/>

God thought about me, and so I grew.<br/>
</p>

<p>But how did you come to us, you dear?<br/>

God thought about you, and so I am here.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="up-and-down" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Up and Down</h2>
<p>The sun is gone down<br/>

  And the moon's in the sky<br/>

But the sun will come up<br/>

  And the moon be laid by.<br/>
</p>

<p>The flower is asleep.<br/>

  But it is not dead,<br/>

When the morning shines<br/>

  It will lift its head.<br/>
</p>

<p>When winter comes<br/>

  It will die! No, no,<br/>

It will only hide<br/>

  From the frost and snow.<br/>
</p>

<p>Sure is the summer,<br/>

  Sure is the sun;<br/>

The night and the winter<br/>

  Away they run.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="up-in-the-tree" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Up in the Tree</h2>
<p>What would you see, if I took you up<br/>

My little aerie-stair?<br/>

You would see the sky like a clear blue cup<br/>

Turned upside down in the air.<br/>
</p>

<p>What would you do, up my aerie-stair<br/>

In my little nest on the tree?<br/>

With cry upon cry you would ripple the air<br/>

To get at what you would see.<br/>
</p>

<p>And what would you reach in the top of the tree<br/>

To still your grasping grief?<br/>

Not a star would you clutch of all you would see,<br/>

You would gather just one green leaf.<br/>
</p>

<p>But when you had lost your greedy grief,<br/>

Content to see from afar,<br/>

Your hand it would hold a withering leaf,<br/>

But your heart a shining star.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-baby-sermon" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Baby-Sermon</h2>
<p>The lightning and thunder<br/>

They go and they come:<br/>

But the stars and the stillness<br/>

Are always at home.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="little-bo-peep" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Little Bo-Peep</h2>
<p>Little Bo-Peep, she has lost her sheep,<br/>

  And will not know where to find them;<br/>

They are over the height and out of sight,<br/>

  Trailing their tails behind them!<br/>
</p>

<p>Little Bo-Peep woke out of her sleep,<br/>

  Jump'd up and set out to find them:<br/>

"The silly things! they've got no wings,<br/>

  And they've left their trails behind them!<br/>
</p>

<p>"They've taken their tails, but they've left their trails,<br/>

  And so I shall follow and find them!"<br/>

For wherever a tail had dragged a trail<br/>

  The grass lay bent behind them.<br/>
</p>

<p>She washed in the brook, and caught up her crook.<br/>

  And after her sheep did run<br/>

Along the trail that went up the dale<br/>

  Across the grass in the sun.<br/>
</p>

<p>She ran with a will, and she came to a hill<br/>

  That went up steep like a spire;<br/>

On its very top the sun seemed to stop,<br/>

  And burned like a flame of fire.<br/>
</p>

<p>But now she went slow, for the hill did go<br/>

  Up steeper as she went higher;<br/>

When she reached its crown, the sun was down,<br/>

  Leaving a trail of fire.<br/>
</p>

<p>And her sheep were gone, and hope she had none.<br/>

  For now was no trail behind them.<br/>

Yes, there they were! long-tailed and fair!<br/>

  But to see was not to find them!<br/>
</p>

<p>Golden in hue, and rosy and blue,<br/>

  And white as blossom of pears,<br/>

Her sheep they did run in the trail of the sun,<br/>

  As she had been running in theirs!<br/>
</p>

<p>After the sun like clouds they did run,<br/>

  But she knew they were her sheep:<br/>

She sat down to cry and look up at the sky,<br/>

  But she cried herself to sleep.<br/>
</p>

<p>And as she slept the dew down wept,<br/>

  And the wind did blow from the sky;<br/>

And doings strange brought a lovely change:<br/>

  She woke with a different cry!<br/>
</p>

<p>Nibble, nibble, crop, without a stop!<br/>

  A hundred little lambs<br/>

Did pluck and eat the grass so sweet<br/>

  That grew in the trail of their dams!<br/>
</p>

<p>She gave one look, she caught up her crook,<br/>

  Wiped away the sleep that did blind her;<br/>

And nibble-nibble-crop, without a stop<br/>

  The lambs came nibbling behind her.<br/>
</p>

<p>Home, home she came, both tired and lame,<br/>

  With three times as large a stock;<br/>

In a month or more, they'll be sheep as before,<br/>

  A lovely, long-wooled flock!<br/>
</p>

<p>But what will she say, if, one fine day,<br/>

  When they've got their bushiest tails,<br/>

Their grown-up game should be just the same,<br/>

  And again she must follow mere trails?<br/>
</p>

<p>Never weep, Bo-Peep, though you lose your sheep,<br/>

  Tears will turn rainbow-laughter!<br/>

In the trail of the sun if the mothers did run,<br/>

  The lambs are sure to run after;<br/>
</p>

<p>But a day is coming when little feet drumming<br/>

  Will wake you up to find them—<br/>

All the old sheep—how your heart will leap!—<br/>

  With their big little lambs behind them!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="little-boy-blue" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Little Boy Blue</h2>
<p>Little Boy Blue lost his way in a wood—<br/>

  <i>Sing apples and cherries, roses and honey:</i><br/>

He said, "I would not go back if I could,<br/>

  <i>It's all so jolly and funny!"</i><br/>
</p>

<p>He sang, "This wood is all my own—<br/>

  <i>Apples and cherries, roses and honey!</i><br/>

Here I will sit, a king on my throne,<br/>

  <i>All so jolly and funny!"</i><br/>
</p>

<p>A little snake crept out of a tree—<br/>

  <i>Apples and cherries, roses and honey:</i><br/>

"Lie down at my feet, little snake," said he—<br/>

  <i>All so jolly and funny!</i><br/>
</p>

<p>A little bird sang in the tree overhead—<br/>

  <i>"Apples and cherries, roses and honey:"</i><br/>

"Come and sing your song on my finger," he said,<br/>

  <i>All so jolly and funny.</i><br/>
</p>

<p>Up coiled the snake; the bird came down,<br/>

And sang him the song of Birdie Brown.<br/>
</p>

<p>But little Boy Blue found it tiresome to sit<br/>

Though it was on a throne: he would walk a bit!<br/>
</p>

<p>He took up his horn, and he blew a blast:<br/>

"Snake, you go first, and, birdie, come last."<br/>
</p>

<p>Waves of green snake o'er the yellow leaves went;<br/>

The snake led the way, and he knew what he meant:<br/>
</p>

<p>But by Boy Blue's head, with flutter and dart,<br/>

Flew Birdie Brown, her song in her heart.<br/>
</p>

<p>Boy Blue came where apples grew fair and sweet:<br/>

"Tree, drop me an apple down at my feet."<br/>
</p>

<p>He came where cherries hung plump and red:<br/>

"Come to my mouth, sweet kisses," he said.<br/>
</p>

<p>And the boughs bow down, and the apples they dapple<br/>

The grass, too many for him to grapple;<br/>
</p>

<p>And the cheeriest cherries, with never a miss,<br/>

Fall to his mouth, each a full-grown kiss.<br/>
</p>

<p>He met a little brook singing a song:<br/>

"Little brook," he said, "you are going wrong,<br/>
</p>

<p>"You must follow me, follow me, follow, I say,<br/>

Do as I tell you, and come this way."<br/>
</p>

<p>And the song-singing, sing-songing forest brook<br/>

Leapt from its bed and after him took;<br/>
</p>

<p>And the dead leaves rustled, yellow and wan,<br/>

As over their beds the water ran.<br/>
</p>

<p>He called every bird that sat on a bough;<br/>

He called every creature with poop and prow—<br/>
</p>

<p>I mean, with two ends, that is, nose and tail:<br/>

With legs or without, they followed full sail;<br/>
</p>

<p>Squirrels that carried their tails like a sack,<br/>

Each his own on his little brown humpy back;<br/>
</p>

<p>Snails that drew their own caravans,<br/>

Poking out their own eyes on the point of a lance,<br/>
</p>

<p>And houseless slugs, white, black, and red—<br/>

Snails too lazy to build a shed;<br/>
</p>

<p>And butterflies, flutterbys, weasels, and larks,<br/>

And owls, and shrew-mice, and harkydarks,<br/>
</p>

<p>Cockchafers, henchafers, cockioli-birds,<br/>

Cockroaches, henroaches, cuckoos in herds;<br/>
</p>

<p>The dappled fawns fawning, the fallow-deer following;<br/>

The swallows and flies, flying and swallowing—<br/>
</p>

<p>All went flitting, and sailing, and flowing<br/>

After the merry boy running and blowing.<br/>
</p>

<p>The spider forgot, and followed him spinning,<br/>

And lost all his thread from end to beginning;<br/>
</p>

<p>The gay wasp forgot his rings and his waist—<br/>

He never had made such undignified haste!<br/>
</p>

<p>The dragon-flies melted to mist with their hurrying;<br/>

The mole forsook his harrowing and burrowing;<br/>
</p>

<p>The bees went buzzing, not busy but beesy,<br/>

And the midges in columns, upright and easy.<br/>
</p>

<p>But Little Boy Blue was not content,<br/>

Calling for followers still as he went,<br/>
</p>

<p>Blowing his horn, and beating his drum,<br/>

And crying aloud, "Come all of you, come!"<br/>
</p>

<p>He said to the shadows, "Come after me;"<br/>

And the shadows began to flicker and flee,<br/>
</p>

<p>And away through the wood went flattering and fluttering,<br/>

Shaking and quivering, quavering and muttering.<br/>
</p>

<p>He said to the wind, "Come, follow; come, follow<br/>

With whistle and pipe, with rustle and hollo;"<br/>
</p>

<p>And the wind wound round at his desire,<br/>

As if Boy had been the gold cock on the spire;<br/>
</p>

<p>And the cock itself flew down from the church<br/>

And left the farmers all in the lurch.<br/>
</p>

<p>Everything, everything, all and sum,<br/>

They run and they fly, they creep and they come;<br/>
</p>

<p>The very trees they tugged at their roots,<br/>

Only their feet were too fast in their boots—<br/>
</p>

<p>After him leaning and straining and bending,<br/>

As on through their boles the army kept wending,<br/>
</p>

<p>Till out of the wood Boy burst on a lea,<br/>

Shouting and calling, "Come after me,"<br/>
</p>

<p>And then they rose with a leafy hiss<br/>

And stood as if nothing had been amiss.<br/>
</p>

<p>Little Boy Blue sat down on a stone,<br/>

And the creatures came round him every one.<br/>
</p>

<p>He said to the clouds, "I want you there!"<br/>

And down they sank through the thin blue air.<br/>
</p>

<p>He said to the sunset far in the west,<br/>

"Come here; I want you; 'tis my behest!"<br/>
</p>

<p>And the sunset came and stood up on the wold,<br/>

And burned and glowed in purple and gold.<br/>
</p>

<p>Then Little Boy Blue began to ponder:<br/>

"What's to be done with them all, I wonder!"<br/>
</p>

<p>He thought a while, then he said, quite low,<br/>

"What to do with you all, I am sure I don't know!"<br/>
</p>

<p>The clouds clodded down till dismal it grew;<br/>

The snake sneaked close; round Birdie Brown flew;<br/>
</p>

<p>The brook, like a cobra, rose on its tail,<br/>

And the wind sank down with a <i>what-will-you</i> wail,<br/>
</p>

<p>And all the creatures sat and stared;<br/>

The mole opened the eyes that he hadn't, and glared;<br/>
</p>

<p>And for rats and bats, and the world and his wife<br/>

Little Boy Blue was afraid of his life.<br/>
</p>

<p>Then Birdie Brown began to sing,<br/>

And what he sang was the very thing:<br/>
</p>

<p>"Little Boy Blue, you have brought us all hither:<br/>

Pray, are we to sit and grow old together?"<br/>
</p>

<p>"Go away; go away," said Little Boy Blue;<br/>

"I'm sure I don't want you! get away—do."<br/>
</p>

<p>"No, no; no, no; no, yes, and no, no,"<br/>

Sang Birdie Brown, "it mustn't be so!<br/>
</p>

<p>"If we've come for no good, we can't go away.<br/>

Give us reason for going, or here we stay!"<br/>
</p>

<p>They covered the earth, they darkened the air,<br/>

They hovered, they sat, with a countless stare.<br/>
</p>

<p>"If I do not give them something to do,<br/>

They will stare me up!" said Little Boy Blue.<br/>
</p>

<p>"Oh dear! oh dear!" he began to cry,<br/>

"They're an awful crew, and I feel so shy!"<br/>
</p>

<p>All of a sudden he thought of a thing,<br/>

And up he stood, and spoke like a king:<br/>
</p>

<p>"You're the plague of my life! have done with your bother!<br/>

Off with you all: take me back to my mother!"<br/>
</p>

<p>The sunset went back to the gates of the west.<br/>

"Follow <i>me</i>" sang Birdie, "I know the way best!"<br/>
</p>

<p>"I am going the same way as fast as I can!"<br/>

Said the brook, as it sank and turned and ran.<br/>
</p>

<p>To the wood fled the shadows, like scared black ghosts:<br/>

"If we stay, we shall all be missed from our posts!"<br/>
</p>

<p>Said the wind, with a voice that had changed its cheer,<br/>

"I was just going there when you brought me here!"<br/>
</p>

<p>"That's where I live," said the sack-backed squirrel,<br/>

And he turned his sack with a swing and a swirl.<br/>
</p>

<p>Said the gold weather-cock, "I'm the churchwarden!"<br/>

Said the mole, "I live in the parson's garden!"<br/>
</p>

<p>Said they all, "If that's where you want us to steer for,<br/>

What on earth or in air did you bring us here for?"<br/>
</p>

<p>"You are none the worse!" said Boy. "If you won't<br/>

Do as I tell you, why, then, don't;<br/>
</p>

<p>"I'll leave you behind, and go home without you;<br/>

And it's time I did: I begin to doubt you!"<br/>
</p>

<p>He jumped to his feet. The snake rose on his tail,<br/>

And hissed three times, a hiss full of bale,<br/>
</p>

<p>And shot out his tongue at Boy Blue to scare him,<br/>

And stared at him, out of his courage to stare him.<br/>
</p>

<p>"You ugly snake," Little Boy Blue said,<br/>

"Get out of my way, or I'll break your head!"<br/>
</p>

<p>The snake would not move, but glared at him glum;<br/>

Boy Blue hit him hard with the stick of his drum.<br/>
</p>

<p>The snake fell down as if he was dead.<br/>

Little Boy Blue set his foot on his head.<br/>
</p>

<p>"Hurrah!" cried the creatures, "hurray! hurrah!<br/>

Little Boy Blue, your will is a law!"<br/>
</p>

<p>And away they went, marching before him,<br/>

And marshalled him home with a high cockolorum.<br/>
</p>

<p>And Birdie Brown sang, <i>"Twirrr twitter, twirrr twee!<br/>

In the rosiest rose-bush a rare nest!<br/>

Twirrr twitter, twirrr twitter, twirrr twitter, twirrrrr tweeeee!<br/>

In the fun he has found the earnest!"</i><br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="willies-question" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Willie's Question</h2>
<h5>I.</h5>

<p>    <i>Willie speaks.</i></p>

<p>Is it wrong, the wish to be great,<br/>

  For I do wish it so?<br/>

I have asked already my sister Kate;<br/>

  She says she does not know.<br/>
</p>

<p>Yestereve at the gate I stood<br/>

  Watching the sun in the west;<br/>

When I saw him look so grand and good<br/>

  It swelled up in my breast.<br/>
</p>

<p>Next from the rising moon<br/>

  It stole like a silver dart;<br/>

In the night when the wind began his tune<br/>

  It woke with a sudden start.<br/>
</p>

<p>This morning a trumpet blast<br/>

  Made all the cottage quake;<br/>

It came so sudden and shook so fast<br/>

  It blew me wide awake.<br/>
</p>

<p>It told me I must make haste,<br/>

  And some great glory win,<br/>

For every day was running to waste,<br/>

  And at once I must begin.<br/>
</p>

<p>I want to be great and strong,<br/>

  I want to begin to-day;<br/>

But if you think it very wrong<br/>

  I will send the wish away.<br/>
</p>

<h5>II.</h5>

<p>    <i>The Father answers.</i></p>

<p>Wrong to wish to be great?<br/>

  No, Willie; it is not wrong:<br/>

The child who stands at the high closed gate<br/>

  Must wish to be tall and strong!<br/>
</p>

<p>If you did not wish to grow<br/>

  I should be a sorry man;<br/>

I should think my boy was dull and slow,<br/>

  Nor worthy of his clan.<br/>
</p>

<p>You are bound to be great, my boy:<br/>

  Wish, and get up, and do.<br/>

Were you content to be little, my joy<br/>

  Would be little enough in you.<br/>
</p>

<p>    <i>Willie speaks.</i></p>

<p>Papa, papa! I'm so glad<br/>

  That what I wish is right!<br/>

I will not lose a chance to be had;<br/>

  I'll begin this very night.<br/>
</p>

<p>I will work so hard at school!<br/>

  I will waste no time in play;<br/>

At my fingers' ends I'll have every rule,<br/>

  For knowledge is power, they say.<br/>
</p>

<p>I <i>would</i> be a king and reign,<br/>

  But I can't be that, and so<br/>

Field-marshal I'll be, I think, and gain<br/>

  Sharp battles and sieges slow.<br/>
</p>

<p>I shall gallop and shout and call,<br/>

  Waving my shining sword:<br/>

Artillery, cavalry, infantry, all<br/>

  Hear and obey my word.<br/>
</p>

<p>Or admiral I will be,<br/>

  Wherever the salt wave runs,<br/>

Sailing, fighting over the sea,<br/>

  With flashing and roaring guns.<br/>
</p>

<p>I will make myself hardy and strong;<br/>

  I will never, never give in.<br/>

I <i>am</i> so glad it is not wrong!<br/>

  At once I will begin.<br/>
</p>

<p>    <i>The Father speaks.</i></p>

<p>Fighting and shining along,<br/>

  All for the show of the thing!<br/>

Any puppet will mimic the grand and strong<br/>

  If you pull the proper string!<br/>
</p>

<p>    <i>Willie speaks.</i></p>

<p>But indeed I want to <i>be</i> great,<br/>

  I should despise mere show;<br/>

The thing I want is the glory-state—<br/>

  Above the rest, you know!<br/>
</p>

<p>    <i>The Father answers.</i></p>

<p>The harder you run that race,<br/>

  The farther you tread that track,<br/>

The greatness you fancy before your face<br/>

  Is the farther behind your back.<br/>
</p>

<p>To be up in the heavens afar,<br/>

  Miles above all the rest,<br/>

Would make a star not the greatest star,<br/>

  Only the dreariest.<br/>
</p>

<p>That book on the highest shelf<br/>

  Is not the greatest book;<br/>

If you would be great, it must be in yourself,<br/>

  Neither by place nor look.<br/>
</p>

<p>The Highest is not high<br/>

  By being higher than others;<br/>

To greatness you come not a step more nigh<br/>

  By getting above your brothers.<br/>
</p>

<h5>III.</h5>

<p>    <i>Willie speaks.</i></p>

<p>I meant the boys at school,<br/>

  I did not mean my brother.<br/>

Somebody first, is there the rule—<br/>

  It must be me or another.<br/>
</p>

<p>    <i>The Father answers.</i></p>

<p>Oh, Willie, it's all the same!<br/>

  They are your brothers all;<br/>

For when you say, "Hallowed be thy name!"<br/>

  Whose Father is it you call?<br/>
</p>

<p>Could you pray for such rule to <i>him</i>?<br/>

  Do you think that he would hear?<br/>

Must he favour one in a greedy whim<br/>

  Where all are his children dear?<br/>
</p>

<p>It is right to get up and do,<br/>

  But why outstrip the rest?<br/>

Why should one of the many be one of the few?<br/>

  Why should <i>you</i> think to be best?<br/>
</p>

<p>    <i>Willie speaks.</i></p>

<p>Then how am I to be great?<br/>

  I know no other way;<br/>

It would be folly to sit and wait,<br/>

  I must up and do, you say!<br/>
</p>

<p>    <i>The Father answers.</i></p>

<p>I do not want you to wait,<br/>

  For few before they die<br/>

Have got so far as begin to be great,<br/>

  The lesson is so high.<br/>
</p>

<p>I will tell you the only plan<br/>

  To climb and not to fall:<br/>

He who would rise and be greater than<br/>

  He is, must be servant of all.<br/>
</p>

<p>Turn it each way in your mind,<br/>

  Try every other plan,<br/>

You may think yourself great, but at length you'll find<br/>

  You are not even a man.<br/>
</p>

<p>Climb to the top of the trees,<br/>

  Climb to the top of the hill,<br/>

Get up on the crown of the sky if you please,<br/>

  You'll be a small creature still.<br/>
</p>

<p>Be admiral, poet, or king,<br/>

  Let praises fill both your ears,<br/>

Your soul will be but a windmill thing<br/>

  Blown round by its hopes and fears.<br/>
</p>

<h5>IV.</h5>

<p>    <i>Willie speaks.</i></p>

<p>Then put me in the way,<br/>

  For you, papa, are a man:<br/>

What thing shall I do this very day?—<br/>

  Only be sure I <i>can</i>.<br/>
</p>

<p>I want to know—I am willing,<br/>

  Let me at least have a chance!<br/>

Shall I give the monkey-boy my shilling?—<br/>

  I want to serve at once.<br/>
</p>

<p>    <i>The Father answers.</i></p>

<p>Give all your shillings you might<br/>

  And hurt your brothers the more;<br/>

He only can serve his fellows aright<br/>

  Who goes in at the little door.<br/>
</p>

<p>We must do the thing we <i>must</i><br/>

  Before the thing we <i>may;</i><br/>

We are unfit for any trust<br/>

  Till we can and do obey.<br/>
</p>

<p>    <i>Willie speaks.</i></p>

<p>I will try more and more;<br/>

  I have nothing now to ask;<br/>

<i>Obedience</i> I know is the little door:<br/>

  Now set me some hard task.<br/>
</p>

<p>    <i>The Father answers.</i></p>

<p>No, Willie; the father of all,<br/>

  Teacher and master high,<br/>

Has set your task beyond recall,<br/>

  Nothing can set it by.<br/>
</p>

<p>    <i>Willie speaks.</i></p>

<p>What is it, father dear,<br/>

  That he would have me do?<br/>

I'd ask himself, but he's not near,<br/>

  And so I must ask you!<br/>
</p>

<p>    <i>The Father answers.</i></p>

<p>Me 'tis no use to ask,<br/>

  I too am one of his boys!<br/>

But he tells each boy his own plain task;<br/>

  Listen, and hear his voice.<br/>
</p>

<p>    <i>Willie speaks.</i></p>

<p>Father, I'm listening <i>so</i><br/>

  To hear him if I may!<br/>

His voice must either be very low,<br/>

  Or very far away!<br/>
</p>

<p>    <i>The Father answers.</i></p>

<p>It is neither hard to hear,<br/>

  Nor hard to understand;<br/>

It is very low, but very near,<br/>

  A still, small, strong command.<br/>
</p>

<p>    <i>Willie answers.</i></p>

<p>I do not hear it at all;<br/>

  I am only hearing you!<br/>
</p>

<p>    <i>The Father speaks.</i></p>

<p>Think: is there nothing, great or small,<br/>

  You ought to go and do?<br/>
</p>

<p>    <i>Willie answers.</i></p>

<p>Let me think:—I ought to feed<br/>

  My rabbits. I went away<br/>

In such a hurry this morning! Indeed<br/>

  They've not had enough to-day!<br/>
</p>

<p>    <i>The Father speaks.</i></p>

<p>That is his whisper low!<br/>

  That is his very word!<br/>

You had only to stop and listen, and so<br/>

  Very plainly you heard!<br/>
</p>

<p>That duty's the little door:<br/>

  You must open it and go in;<br/>

There is nothing else to do before,<br/>

  There is nowhere else to begin.<br/>
</p>

<p>    <i>Willie speaks.</i></p>

<p>But that's so easily done!<br/>

  It's such a trifling affair!<br/>

So nearly over as soon as begun.<br/>

  For that he can hardly care!<br/>
</p>

<p>    <i>The Father answers.</i></p>

<p>You are turning from his call<br/>

  If you let that duty wait;<br/>

You would not think any duty small<br/>

  If you yourself were great.<br/>
</p>

<p>The nearest is at life's core;<br/>

  With the first, you all begin:<br/>

What matter how little the little door<br/>

  If it only let you in?<br/>
</p>

<h5>V.</h5>

<p>    <i>Willie speaks.</i></p>

<p>Papa, I am come again:<br/>

  It is now three months and more<br/>

That I've tried to do the thing that was plain,<br/>

  And I feel as small as before.<br/>
</p>

<p>    <i>The Father answers.</i></p>

<p>Your honour comes too slow?<br/>

  How much then have you done?<br/>

One foot on a mole-heap, would you crow<br/>

  As if you had reached the sun?<br/>
</p>

<p>    <i>Willie speaks.</i></p>

<p>But I cannot help a doubt<br/>

  Whether this way be the true:<br/>

The more I do to work it out<br/>

  The more there comes to do;<br/>
</p>

<p>And yet, were all done and past,<br/>

  I should feel just as small,<br/>

For when I had tried to the very last—<br/>

  'Twas my duty, after all!<br/>
</p>

<p>It is only much the same<br/>

  As not being liar or thief!<br/>
</p>

<p>    <i>The Father answers.</i></p>

<p>One who tried it found even, with shame,<br/>

  That of sinners he was the chief!<br/>
</p>

<p>My boy, I am glad indeed<br/>

  You have been finding the truth!<br/>
</p>

<p>    <i>Willie speaks.</i></p>

<p>But where's the good? I shall never speed—<br/>

  Be one whit greater, in sooth!<br/>
</p>

<p>If duty itself must fail,<br/>

  And that be the only plan,<br/>

How shall my scarce begun duty prevail<br/>

  To make me a mighty man?<br/>
</p>

<p>    <i>The Father answers.</i></p>

<p>Ah, Willie! what if it were<br/>

  Quite another way to fall?<br/>

What if the greatness itself lie there—<br/>

  In knowing that you are small?<br/>
</p>

<p>In seeing the good so good<br/>

  That you feel poor, weak, and low;<br/>

And hungrily long for it as for food,<br/>

  With an endless need to grow?<br/>
</p>

<p>The man who was lord of fate,<br/>

  Born in an ox's stall,<br/>

Was great because he was much too great<br/>

  To care about greatness at all.<br/>
</p>

<p>Ever and only he sought<br/>

  The will of his Father good;<br/>

Never of what was high he thought,<br/>

  But of what his Father would.<br/>
</p>

<p>You long to be great; you try;<br/>

  You feel yourself smaller still:<br/>

In the name of God let ambition die;<br/>

  Let him make you what he will.<br/>
</p>

<p>Who does the truth, is one<br/>

  With the living Truth above:<br/>

Be God's obedient little son,<br/>

  Let ambition die in love.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-early-bird" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Early Bird</h2>
<p>A little bird sat on the edge of her nest;<br/>

  Her yellow-beaks slept as sound as tops;<br/>

Day-long she had worked almost without rest,<br/>

  And had filled every one of their gibbous crops;<br/>

Her own she had filled just over-full,<br/>

And she felt like a dead bird stuffed with wool.<br/>
</p>

<p>"Oh dear!" she sighed, as she sat with her head<br/>

  Sunk in her chest, and no neck at all,<br/>

Looking like an apple on a feather-bed<br/>

  Poked and rounded and fluffed to a ball,<br/>

"What's to be done if things don't reform?<br/>

I cannot tell where there is one more worm!<br/>
</p>

<p>"I've had fifteen to-day, and the children five each,<br/>

  Besides a few flies, and some very fat spiders:<br/>

Who will dare say I don't do as I preach?<br/>

  I set an example to all providers!<br/>

But what's the use? We want a storm:<br/>

I don't know where there's a single worm!"<br/>
</p>

<p>"There's five in my crop," chirped a wee, wee bird<br/>

  Who woke at the voice of his mother's pain;<br/>

"I know where there's five!" And with the word<br/>

  He tucked in his head and went off again.<br/>

"The folly of childhood," sighed his mother,<br/>

"Has always been my especial bother!"<br/>
</p>

<p>Careless the yellow-beaks slept on,<br/>

  They never had heard of the bogy, Tomorrow;<br/>

The mother sat outside making her moan—<br/>

  "I shall soon have to beg, or steal, or borrow!<br/>

I have always to say, the night before,<br/>

Where shall I find one red worm more!"<br/>
</p>

<p>Her case was this, she had gobbled too many,<br/>

  And sleepless, had an attack she called foresight:<br/>

A barn of crumbs, if she knew but of any!<br/>

  Could she but get of the great worm-store sight!<br/>

The eastern sky was growing red<br/>

Ere she laid her wise beak in its feather-bed.<br/>
</p>

<p>Just then, the fellow who knew of five,<br/>

  Nor troubled his sleep with anxious tricks,<br/>

Woke, and stirred, and felt alive:<br/>

  "To-day," he said, "I am up to six!<br/>

But my mother feels in her lot the crook—<br/>

What if I tried my own little hook!"<br/>
</p>

<p>When his mother awoke, she winked her eyes<br/>

  As if she had dreamed that she was a mole:<br/>

Could she believe them? "What a huge prize<br/>

  That child is dragging out of its hole!"<br/>

The fledgeling indeed had just caught his third!<br/>

<i>And here is a fable to catch the bird!</i><br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-bonny-bonny-dell" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Bonny, Bonny Dell</h2>
<p>Oh! the bonny, bonny dell, whaur the yorlin sings,<br/>

Wi' a clip o' the sunshine atween his wings;<br/>

Whaur the birks are a' straikit wi' fair munelicht,<br/>

And the brume hings its lamps by day and by nicht;<br/>

Whaur the burnie comes trottin ower shingle and stane<br/>

Liltin bonny havers til 'tsel its lane;<br/>

And the sliddery troot wi' ae soop o' its tail<br/>

Is ahint the green weed's dark swingin veil!<br/>

Oh, the bonny, bonny dell, whaur I sang as I saw<br/>

The yorlin, the brume, and the burnie, and a'!<br/>
</p>

<p>Oh! the bonny, bonny dell, whaur the primroses won,<br/>

Luikin oot o' their leaves like wee sons o' the sun;<br/>

Whaur the wild roses hing like flickers o' flame,<br/>

And fa' at the touch wi' a dainty shame;<br/>

Whaur the bee swings ower the white-clovery sod,<br/>

And the butterfly flits like a stray thoucht o' God;<br/>

Whaur, like arrow shot frae life's unseen bow,<br/>

The dragon-fly burns the sunlicht throu!<br/>

Oh, the bonny, bonny dell, whaur I sang to see<br/>

The rose and the primrose, the draigon and bee!<br/>
</p>

<p>Oh! the bonny, bonny dell, whaur the mune luiks doon<br/>

As gien she war hearin a soughless tune,<br/>

Whan the flooers and the birdies are a' asleep,<br/>

And the verra burnie gangs creepy-creep;<br/>

Whaur the corn-craik craiks i' the lang-heidit rye,<br/>

And the nicht is the safter for his rouch cry;<br/>

Whaur the win' wud fain lie doon on the slope,<br/>

And the gloamin waukens the high-reachin hope!<br/>

Oh, the bonny, bonny dell, whaur, silent, I felt<br/>

The mune and the darkness baith into me melt!<br/>
</p>

<p>Oh! the bonny, bonny dell, whaur the sun luiks in<br/>

Sayin, "Here awa, there awa, hand awa, Sin!"<br/>

Sayin darkness and sorrow a' work for the licht,<br/>

And the will o' God was the hert o' the nicht;<br/>

Whaur the laverock hings hie, on his ain sang borne,<br/>

Wi' bird-shout and tirralee hailin the morn;<br/>

Whaur my hert ran ower wi' the lusome bliss<br/>

That, come winter, come weather, nocht gaed amiss!<br/>

Oh, the bonny, bonny dell, whaur the sun luikit in<br/>

Sayin, "Here awa, there awa, hand awa, Sin!"<br/>
</p>

<p>Oh! the bonny, bonny dell, whaur aft I wud lie,<br/>

Wi' Jeanie aside me sae sweet and sae shy;<br/>

Whaur the starry gowans wi' rose-dippit tips<br/>

War as white as her cheek and as reid as her lips;<br/>

Whaur she spread her gowd hert till she saw that I saw,<br/>

Syne fauldit it up and gied me it a';<br/>

Whaur o' sunlicht and munelicht she was the queen,<br/>

For baith war but middlin withoot my Jean!<br/>

Oh, the bonny, bonny dell, whaur aft I wud lie,<br/>

Wi' Jeanie aside me sae sweet and sae shy!<br/>
</p>

<p>Oh! the bonny, bonny dell, whaur the kirkyard lies<br/>

A' day and a' nicht luikin up to the skies;<br/>

Whaur the sheep wauken up i' the simmer nicht,<br/>

Tak a bite and lie doon, and await the licht;<br/>

Whaur the psalms roll ower the grassy heaps;<br/>

Whaur the win' comes and moans, and the rain comes and weeps;<br/>

Whaur my Jeanie's no lyin in a' the lair,<br/>

For she's up and awa up the angels' stair!<br/>

Oh, the bonny, bonny dell, whaur the kirkyard lies,<br/>

Whaur the stars luik doon, and the nicht-wind sighs!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="nannie-braw" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Nannie Braw</h2>
<p>I like ye weel upo Sundays, Nannie,<br/>

  I' yer goon and yer ribbons and a';<br/>

But I like ye better on Mondays, Nannie,<br/>

  Whan ye're no sae buskit and braw.<br/>
</p>

<p>For whan we're sittin sae douce, Nannie,<br/>

  Wi' the lave o' the worshippin fowk,<br/>

That aneth the haly hoose, Nannie,<br/>

  Ye micht hear a moudiwarp howk,<br/>
</p>

<p>It <i>will</i> come into my heid, Nannie,<br/>

  O' yer braws ye are thinkin a wee;<br/>

No alane o' the Bible-seed, Nannie,<br/>

  Nor the minister nor me!<br/>
</p>

<p>Syne hame athort the green, Nannie,<br/>

  Ye gang wi' a toss o' yer chin;<br/>

And there walks a shadow atween 's, Nannie,<br/>

  A dark ane though it be thin!<br/>
</p>

<p>But noo, whan I see ye gang, Nannie,<br/>

  Eident at what's to be dune,<br/>

Liltin a haiveless sang, Nannie,<br/>

  I wud kiss yer verra shune!<br/>
</p>

<p>Wi' yer silken net on yer hair, Nannie,<br/>

  I' yer bonnie blue petticoat,<br/>

Wi' yer kin'ly arms a' bare, Nannie,<br/>

  On yer ilka motion I doat.<br/>
</p>

<p>For, oh, but ye're canty and free, Nannie,<br/>

  Airy o' hert and o' fit!<br/>

A star-beam glents frae yer ee, Nannie—<br/>

  O' yersel ye're no thinkin a bit!<br/>
</p>

<p>Fillin the cogue frae the coo, Nannie,<br/>

  Skimmin the yallow ream,<br/>

Pourin awa the het broo, Nannie,<br/>

  Lichtin the lampie's leme,<br/>
</p>

<p>Turnin or steppin alang, Nannie,<br/>

  Liftin and layin doon,<br/>

Settin richt what's aye gaein wrang, Nannie,<br/>

  Yer motion's baith dance and tune!<br/>
</p>

<p>I' the hoose ye're a licht and a law, Nannie,<br/>

  A servan like him 'at's abune:<br/>

Oh, a woman's bonniest o' a', Nannie,<br/>

  Doin what <i>maun</i> be dune!<br/>
</p>

<p>Cled i' yer Sunday claes, Nannie,<br/>

  Fair kythe ye to mony an ee;<br/>

But cled i' yer ilka-day's, Nannie,<br/>

  Ye draw the hert frae me!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="ower-the-hedge" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Ower the Hedge</h2>
<h5>I.</h5>

<p>"Bonny lassie, rosy lassie,<br/>

  Ken ye what is care?<br/>

Had ye ever a thought, lassie,<br/>

  Made yer hertie sair?"<br/>
</p>

<p>Johnnie said it, Johnnie seekin<br/>

  Sicht o' Mally's face,<br/>

Keekin i' the hedge o' holly<br/>

  For a thinner place.<br/>
</p>

<p>"Na," said Mally, pawky smilin,<br/>

  "Nought o' care ken I;<br/>

Gien I meet the gruesome carline,<br/>

  I s' hand weel ootby!"<br/>
</p>

<p>"Lang be licht o' hert, Mally,<br/>

  As o' fut and ban'!<br/>

Lang be ready wi' sic answer<br/>

  To ony speirin man!"<br/>
</p>

<p>"Ay, the men 'll aye be speirin!<br/>

  Troth, it's naething new!<br/>

There's yersel wi' queston, queston—<br/>

  And there's mair like you!"<br/>
</p>

<p>"Deed ye wadna mock me, Mally,<br/>

  Wi' yer lauchin ee,<br/>

Gien ye saw the thing aye muvin<br/>

  I' the hert o' me!"<br/>
</p>

<p>"Troth, I'm no sae pryin, laddie,<br/>

  Yon's no my concern!<br/>

Jist as sune I wud gang speirin<br/>

  What's intil yon cairn!"<br/>
</p>

<p>"Still and on, there's ae thing, Mally,<br/>

  Yont yer help, my doo—<br/>

That's to haud my hert frae lo'in<br/>

  At the hert o' you!"<br/>
</p>

<h5>II.</h5>

<p>Johnnie turned and left her,<br/>

  Listit for the war;<br/>

In a year cam limpin<br/>

  Hame wi' mony a scar.<br/>
</p>

<p>Wha was that was sittin<br/>

  On the brae, sae still?<br/>

Worn and wan and altert,<br/>

  Could it be hersel?<br/>
</p>

<p>Cled in black, her eelids<br/>

  Reid wi' greitin sair—<br/>

Was she wife and widow<br/>

  In a towmond bare?<br/>
</p>

<p>Mally's hert played wallop,<br/>

  Kenned him or he spak:<br/>

"Are ye no deid, Johnnie?<br/>

  Is't yersel come back?"<br/>
</p>

<p>"Are ye wife or widow?<br/>

  Tell me in a breath;<br/>

Lanely life is fearsome,<br/>

  Waur nor ony death!"<br/>
</p>

<p>"Wha cud be a widow<br/>

  Wife was never nane?<br/>

Noo, gien ye will hae me,<br/>

  Noo I will be ane!"<br/>
</p>

<p>Crutch awa he flang it,<br/>

  Clean forgot his hairms,<br/>

Cudna stan' withoot it,<br/>

  Fell in Mally's airms.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-mermaid" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Mermaid</h2>
<p>Up cam the tide wi' a burst and a whush,<br/>

  And back gaed the stanes wi' a whurr;<br/>

The king's son walkit i' the evenin hush,<br/>

  To hear the sea murmur and murr.<br/>
</p>

<p>Straucht ower the water slade frae the mune<br/>

  A glimmer o' cauld weet licht;<br/>

Ane o' her horns rase the water abune,<br/>

  And lampit across the nicht.<br/>
</p>

<p>Quhat's that, and that, far oot i' the gray,<br/>

  The laich mune bobbin afore?<br/>

It's the bonny sea-maidens at their play—<br/>

  Haud awa, king's son, frae the shore.<br/>
</p>

<p>Ae rock stude up like an auld aik-root,<br/>

  The king's son he steppit ahin';<br/>

The bonny sea-maidens cam gambolin oot,<br/>

  Kaimin their hair to the win'.<br/>
</p>

<p>O merry their lauch whan they fan the warm san',<br/>

  For the lichtsome reel sae meet!<br/>

Ilk are flang her kaim frae her pearly ban',<br/>

  And tuik til her pearly feet.<br/>
</p>

<p>But are, wha's beauty was dream and spell,<br/>

  Her kaim on the rock she cuist;<br/>

Her back was scarce turnt whan the munelicht shell<br/>

  Was lyin i' the prince's breist!<br/>
</p>

<p>The cluds grew grim as he watched their game,<br/>

  Th' win' blew up an angry tune;<br/>

Ane efter are tuik up her kaim,<br/>

  And seaward gaed dancin doon.<br/>
</p>

<p>But are, wi' hair like the mune in a clud,<br/>

  Was left by the rock her lane;<br/>

Wi' flittin ban's, like a priest's, she stude,<br/>

  'Maist veiled in a rush o' rain.<br/>
</p>

<p>She spied the prince, she sank at his feet,<br/>

  And lay like a wreath o' snaw<br/>

Meltin awa i' the win' and weet<br/>

  O' a wastin wastlin thaw.<br/>
</p>

<p>He liftit her, trimlin wi' houp and dreid,<br/>

  And hame wi' his prize he gaed,<br/>

And laid her doon, like a witherin weed,<br/>

  Saft on a gowden bed.<br/>
</p>

<p>A' that nicht, and a' day the neist,<br/>

  She never liftit heid;<br/>

Quaiet lay the sea, and quaiet lay her breist,<br/>

  And quaiet lay the kirkyard-deid.<br/>
</p>

<p>But quhan at the gloamin a sea-breeze keen<br/>

  Blew intil the glimsome room,<br/>

Like twa settin stars she opened her een,<br/>

  And the sea-flooer began to bloom.<br/>
</p>

<p>And she saw the prince kneelin at her bed,<br/>

  And afore the mune was new,<br/>

Careless and cauld she was wooed and wed—<br/>

  But a winsome wife she grew.<br/>
</p>

<p>And a' gaed weel till their bairn was born,<br/>

  And syne she cudna sleep;<br/>

She wud rise at midnicht, and wan'er till morn,<br/>

  Hark-harkin the sough o' the deep.<br/>
</p>

<p>Ae nicht whan the win' gaed ravin aboot,<br/>

  And the winnocks war speckled wi' faem,<br/>

Frae room to room she strayt in and oot,<br/>

  And she spied her pearly kaim.<br/>
</p>

<p>She twined up her hair wi' eager ban's,<br/>

  And in wi' the rainbow kaim!<br/>

She's oot, and she's aff ower the shinin san's<br/>

  And awa til her moanin hame!<br/>
</p>

<p>The prince he startit whaur he lay,<br/>

  He waukit, and was himlane!<br/>

He soucht far intil the mornin gray,<br/>

  But his bonny sea-wife was gane!<br/>
</p>

<p>And ever and aye, i' the mirk or the mune,<br/>

  Whan the win' blew saft frae the sea,<br/>

The sad shore up and the sad shore doon<br/>

  By the lanely rock paced he.<br/>
</p>

<p>But never again on the sands to play<br/>

  Cam the maids o' the merry, cauld sea;<br/>

He heard them lauch far oot i' the bay,<br/>

  But hert-alane gaed he.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="song-of-the-lonely" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Song of the Lonely</h2>
Son, first-born, at home abiding!
  All without is cold and bare:
Hide me from the tempest’s chiding
  Warm beside the Father’s chair.
  
I am homesick, Lord of splendour!
  Twilight fills my soul with fright:
Let thy countenance befriend her,
  Shining from the halls of light.
  
I am homesick, loving Father!
  Long years hath the pain increased:
Soon, oh soon! thy children gather
  To the endless marriage-feast.
		</article>
		<article id="the-diary-of-an-old-soul" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">A Book of Strife</p>
				<p>in the Form of</p>
				<h2 epub:type="title">The Diary of an Old Soul</h2>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="the-diary-of-an-old-soul-dedication">
				<header>
					<h3>Dedication</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Sweet friends, receive my offering. You will find</span>
					<span>Against each worded page a white page set:—</span>
					<span>This is the mirror of each friendly mind</span>
					<span>Reflecting that. In this book we are met.</span>
					<span>Make it, dear hearts, of worth to you indeed:—</span>
					<span>Let your white page be ground, my print be seed,</span>
					<span>Growing to golden ears, that faith and hope shall feed.</span>
				</p>
				<footer>
					<p>Your old soul.</p>
				</footer>
			</section>
			<section id="the-diary-of-an-old-soul-january">
				<header>
					<h3>January</h3>
				</header>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">1.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>LORD, what I once had done with youthful might,</span>
						<span>Had I been from the first true to the truth,</span>
						<span>Grant me, now old, to do—with better sight,</span>
						<span>And humbler heart, if not the brain of youth;</span>
						<span>So wilt thou, in thy gentleness and ruth,</span>
						<span>Lead back thy old soul, by the path of pain,</span>
						<span>Round to his best—young eyes and heart and brain.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">2.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>A dim aurora rises in my east,</span>
						<span>Beyond the line of jagged questions hoar,</span>
						<span>As if the head of our intombed High Priest</span>
						<span>Began to glow behind the unopened door:</span>
						<span>Sure the gold wings will soon rise from the gray!—</span>
						<span>They rise not. Up I rise, press on the more,</span>
						<span>To meet the slow coming of the Master's day.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">3.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Sometimes I wake, and, lo! I have forgot,</span>
						<span>And drifted out upon an ebbing sea!</span>
						<span>My soul that was at rest now resteth not,</span>
						<span>For I am with myself and not with thee;</span>
						<span>Truth seems a blind moon in a glaring morn,</span>
						<span>Where nothing is but sick-heart vanity:</span>
						<span>Oh, thou who knowest! save thy child forlorn.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">4.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Death, like high faith, levelling, lifteth all.</span>
						<span>When I awake, my daughter and my son,</span>
						<span>Grown sister and brother, in my arms shall fall,</span>
						<span>Tenfold my girl and boy. Sure every one</span>
						<span>Of all the brood to the old wings will run.</span>
						<span>Whole-hearted is my worship of the man</span>
						<span>From whom my earthly history began.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">5.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Thy fishes breathe but where thy waters roll;</span>
						<span>Thy birds fly but within thy airy sea;</span>
						<span>My soul breathes only in thy infinite soul;</span>
						<span>I breathe, I think, I love, I live but thee.</span>
						<span>Oh breathe, oh think,—O Love, live into me;</span>
						<span>Unworthy is my life till all divine,</span>
						<span>Till thou see in me only what is thine.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">6.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Then shall I breathe in sweetest sharing, then</span>
						<span>Think in harmonious consort with my kin;</span>
						<span>Then shall I love well all my father's men,</span>
						<span>Feel one with theirs the life my heart within.</span>
						<span>Oh brothers! sisters holy! hearts divine!</span>
						<span>Then I shall be all yours, and nothing mine—</span>
						<span>To every human heart a mother-twin.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">7.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I see a child before an empty house,</span>
						<span>Knocking and knocking at the closed door;</span>
						<span>He wakes dull echoes—but nor man nor mouse,</span>
						<span>If he stood knocking there for evermore.—</span>
						<span>A mother angel, see! folding each wing,</span>
						<span>Soft-walking, crosses straight the empty floor,</span>
						<span>And opens to the obstinate praying thing.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">8.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Were there but some deep, holy spell, whereby</span>
						<span>Always I should remember thee—some mode</span>
						<span>Of feeling the pure heat-throb momently</span>
						<span>Of the spirit-fire still uttering this I!—</span>
						<span>Lord, see thou to it, take thou remembrance' load:</span>
						<span>Only when I bethink me can I cry;</span>
						<span>Remember thou, and prick me with love's goad.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">9.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>If to myself—"God sometimes interferes"—</span>
						<span>I said, my faith at once would be struck blind.</span>
						<span>I see him all in all, the lifing mind,</span>
						<span>Or nowhere in the vacant miles and years.</span>
						<span>A love he is that watches and that hears,</span>
						<span>Or but a mist fumed up from minds of men,</span>
						<span>Whose fear and hope reach out beyond their ken.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">10.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>When I no more can stir my soul to move,</span>
						<span>And life is but the ashes of a fire;</span>
						<span>When I can but remember that my heart</span>
						<span>Once used to live and love, long and aspire,—</span>
						<span>Oh, be thou then the first, the one thou art;</span>
						<span>Be thou the calling, before all answering love,</span>
						<span>And in me wake hope, fear, boundless desire.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">11.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I thought that I had lost thee; but, behold!</span>
						<span>Thou comest to me from the horizon low,</span>
						<span>Across the fields outspread of green and gold—</span>
						<span>Fair carpet for thy feet to come and go.</span>
						<span>Whence I know not, or how to me thou art come!—</span>
						<span>Not less my spirit with calm bliss doth glow,</span>
						<span>Meeting thee only thus, in nature vague and dumb.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">12.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Doubt swells and surges, with swelling doubt behind!</span>
						<span>My soul in storm is but a tattered sail,</span>
						<span>Streaming its ribbons on the torrent gale;</span>
						<span>In calm, 'tis but a limp and flapping thing:</span>
						<span>Oh! swell it with thy breath; make it a wing,—</span>
						<span>To sweep through thee the ocean, with thee the wind</span>
						<span>Nor rest until in thee its haven it shall find.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">13.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>The idle flapping of the sail is doubt;</span>
						<span>Faith swells it full to breast the breasting seas.</span>
						<span>Bold, conscience, fast, and rule the ruling helm;</span>
						<span>Hell's freezing north no tempest can send out,</span>
						<span>But it shall toss thee homeward to thy leas;</span>
						<span>Boisterous wave-crest never shall o'erwhelm</span>
						<span>Thy sea-float bark as safe as field-borne rooted elm.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">14.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Sometimes, hard-trying, it seems I cannot pray—</span>
						<span>For doubt, and pain, and anger, and all strife.</span>
						<span>Yet some poor half-fledged prayer-bird from the nest</span>
						<span>May fall, flit, fly, perch—crouch in the bowery breast</span>
						<span>Of the large, nation-healing tree of life;—</span>
						<span>Moveless there sit through all the burning day,</span>
						<span>And on my heart at night a fresh leaf cooling lay.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">15.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>My harvest withers. Health, my means to live—</span>
						<span>All things seem rushing straight into the dark.</span>
						<span>But the dark still is God. I would not give</span>
						<span>The smallest silver-piece to turn the rush</span>
						<span>Backward or sideways. Am I not a spark</span>
						<span>Of him who is the light?—Fair hope doth flush</span>
						<span>My east.—Divine success—Oh, hush and hark!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">16.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Thy will be done. I yield up everything.</span>
						<span>"The life is more than meat"—then more than health;</span>
						<span>"The body more than raiment"—then than wealth;</span>
						<span>The hairs I made not, thou art numbering.</span>
						<span>Thou art my life—I the brook, thou the spring.</span>
						<span>Because thine eyes are open, I can see;</span>
						<span>Because thou art thyself, 'tis therefore I am me.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">17.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>No sickness can come near to blast my health;</span>
						<span>My life depends not upon any meat;</span>
						<span>My bread comes not from any human tilth;</span>
						<span>No wings will grow upon my changeless wealth;</span>
						<span>Wrong cannot touch it, violence or deceit;</span>
						<span>Thou art my life, my health, my bank, my barn—</span>
						<span>And from all other gods thou plain dost warn.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">18.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Care thou for mine whom I must leave behind;</span>
						<span>Care that they know who 'tis for them takes care;</span>
						<span>Thy present patience help them still to bear;</span>
						<span>Lord, keep them clearing, growing, heart and mind;</span>
						<span>In one thy oneness us together bind;</span>
						<span>Last earthly prayer with which to thee I cling—</span>
						<span>Grant that, save love, we owe not anything.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">19.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>'Tis well, for unembodied thought a live,</span>
						<span>True house to build—of stubble, wood, nor hay;</span>
						<span>So, like bees round the flower by which they thrive,</span>
						<span>My thoughts are busy with the informing truth,</span>
						<span>And as I build, I feed, and grow in youth—</span>
						<span>Hoping to stand fresh, clean, and strong, and gay,</span>
						<span>When up the east comes dawning His great day.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">20.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Thy will is truth—'tis therefore fate, the strong.</span>
						<span>Would that my will did sweep full swing with thine!</span>
						<span>Then harmony with every spheric song,</span>
						<span>And conscious power, would give sureness divine.</span>
						<span>Who thinks to thread thy great laws' onward throng,</span>
						<span>Is as a fly that creeps his foolish way</span>
						<span>Athwart an engine's wheels in smooth resistless play.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">21.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Thou in my heart hast planted, gardener divine,</span>
						<span>A scion of the tree of life: it grows;</span>
						<span>But not in every wind or weather it blows;</span>
						<span>The leaves fall sometimes from the baby tree,</span>
						<span>And the life-power seems melting into pine;</span>
						<span>Yet still the sap keeps struggling to the shine,</span>
						<span>And the unseen root clings cramplike unto thee.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">22.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Do thou, my God, my spirit's weather control;</span>
						<span>And as I do not gloom though the day be dun,</span>
						<span>Let me not gloom when earth-born vapours roll</span>
						<span>Across the infinite zenith of my soul.</span>
						<span>Should sudden brain-frost through the heart's summer run,</span>
						<span>Cold, weary, joyless, waste of air and sun,</span>
						<span>Thou art my south, my summer-wind, my all, my one.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">23.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>O Life, why dost thou close me up in death?</span>
						<span>O Health, why make me inhabit heaviness?—</span>
						<span>I ask, yet know: the sum of this distress,</span>
						<span>Pang-haunted body, sore-dismayed mind,</span>
						<span>Is but the egg that rounds the winged faith;</span>
						<span>When that its path into the air shall find,</span>
						<span>My heart will follow, high above cold, rain, and wind.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">24.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I can no more than lift my weary eyes;</span>
						<span>Therefore I lift my weary eyes—no more.</span>
						<span>But my eyes pull my heart, and that, before</span>
						<span>'Tis well awake, knocks where the conscience lies;</span>
						<span>Conscience runs quick to the spirit's hidden door:</span>
						<span>Straightway, from every sky-ward window, cries</span>
						<span>Up to the Father's listening ears arise.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">25.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Not in my fancy now I search to find thee;</span>
						<span>Not in its loftiest forms would shape or bind thee;</span>
						<span>I cry to one whom I can never know,</span>
						<span>Filling me with an infinite overflow;</span>
						<span>Not to a shape that dwells within my heart,</span>
						<span>Clothed in perfections love and truth assigned thee,</span>
						<span>But to the God thou knowest that thou art.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">26.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Not, Lord, because I have done well or ill;</span>
						<span>Not that my mind looks up to thee clear-eyed;</span>
						<span>Not that it struggles in fast cerements tied;</span>
						<span>Not that I need thee daily sorer still;</span>
						<span>Not that I wretched, wander from thy will;</span>
						<span>Not now for any cause to thee I cry,</span>
						<span>But this, that thou art thou, and here am I.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">27.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Yestereve, Death came, and knocked at my thin door.</span>
						<span>I from my window looked: the thing I saw,</span>
						<span>The shape uncouth, I had not seen before.</span>
						<span>I was disturbed—with fear, in sooth, not awe;</span>
						<span>Whereof ashamed, I instantly did rouse</span>
						<span>My will to seek thee—only to fear the more:</span>
						<span>Alas! I could not find thee in the house.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">28.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I was like Peter when he began to sink.</span>
						<span>To thee a new prayer therefore I have got—</span>
						<span>That, when Death comes in earnest to my door,</span>
						<span>Thou wouldst thyself go, when the latch doth clink,</span>
						<span>And lead him to my room, up to my cot;</span>
						<span>Then hold thy child's hand, hold and leave him not,</span>
						<span>Till Death has done with him for evermore.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">29.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Till Death has done with him?—Ah, leave me then!</span>
						<span>And Death has done with me, oh, nevermore!</span>
						<span>He comes—and goes—to leave me in thy arms,</span>
						<span>Nearer thy heart, oh, nearer than before!</span>
						<span>To lay thy child, naked, new-born again</span>
						<span>Of mother earth, crept free through many harms,</span>
						<span>Upon thy bosom—still to the very core.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">30.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Come to me, Lord: I will not speculate how,</span>
						<span>Nor think at which door I would have thee appear,</span>
						<span>Nor put off calling till my floors be swept,</span>
						<span>But cry, "Come, Lord, come any way, come now."</span>
						<span>Doors, windows, I throw wide; my head I bow,</span>
						<span>And sit like some one who so long has slept</span>
						<span>That he knows nothing till his life draw near.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">31.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>O Lord, I have been talking to the people;</span>
						<span>Thought's wheels have round me whirled a fiery zone,</span>
						<span>And the recoil of my words' airy ripple</span>
						<span>My heart unheedful has puffed up and blown.</span>
						<span>Therefore I cast myself before thee prone:</span>
						<span>Lay cool hands on my burning brain, and press</span>
						<span>From my weak heart the swelling emptiness.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</section>
			<section id="the-diary-of-an-old-soul-february">
				<header>
					<h3>February</h3>
				</header>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">1.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I TO myself have neither power nor worth,</span>
						<span>Patience nor love, nor anything right good;</span>
						<span>My soul is a poor land, plenteous in dearth—</span>
						<span>Here blades of grass, there a small herb for food—</span>
						<span>A nothing that would be something if it could;</span>
						<span>But if obedience, Lord, in me do grow,</span>
						<span>I shall one day be better than I know.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">2.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>The worst power of an evil mood is this—</span>
						<span>It makes the bastard self seem in the right,</span>
						<span>Self, self the end, the goal of human bliss.</span>
						<span>But if the Christ-self in us be the might</span>
						<span>Of saving God, why should I spend my force</span>
						<span>With a dark thing to reason of the light—</span>
						<span>Not push it rough aside, and hold obedient course?</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">3.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Back still it comes to this: there was a man</span>
						<span>Who said, "I am the truth, the life, the way:"—</span>
						<span>Shall I pass on, or shall I stop and hear?—</span>
						<span>"Come to the Father but by me none can:"</span>
						<span>What then is this?—am I not also one</span>
						<span>Of those who live in fatherless dismay?</span>
						<span>I stand, I look, I listen, I draw near.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">4.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>My Lord, I find that nothing else will do,</span>
						<span>But follow where thou goest, sit at thy feet,</span>
						<span>And where I have thee not, still run to meet.</span>
						<span>Roses are scentless, hopeless are the morns,</span>
						<span>Rest is but weakness, laughter crackling thorns,</span>
						<span>If thou, the Truth, do not make them the true:</span>
						<span>Thou art my life, O Christ, and nothing else will do.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">5.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Thou art here—in heaven, I know, but not from here—</span>
						<span>Although thy separate self do not appear;</span>
						<span>If I could part the light from out the day,</span>
						<span>There I should have thee! But thou art too near:</span>
						<span>How find thee walking, when thou art the way?</span>
						<span>Oh, present Christ! make my eyes keen as stings,</span>
						<span>To see thee at their heart, the glory even of things.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">6.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>That thou art nowhere to be found, agree</span>
						<span>Wise men, whose eyes are but for surfaces;</span>
						<span>Men with eyes opened by the second birth,</span>
						<span>To whom the seen, husk of the unseen is,</span>
						<span>Descry thee soul of everything on earth.</span>
						<span>Who know thy ends, thy means and motions see:</span>
						<span>Eyes made for glory soon discover thee.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">7.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Thou near then, I draw nearer—to thy feet,</span>
						<span>And sitting in thy shadow, look out on the shine;</span>
						<span>Ready at thy first word to leave my seat—</span>
						<span>Not thee: thou goest too. From every clod</span>
						<span>Into thy footprint flows the indwelling wine;</span>
						<span>And in my daily bread, keen-eyed I greet</span>
						<span>Its being's heart, the very body of God.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">8.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Thou wilt interpret life to me, and men,</span>
						<span>Art, nature, yea, my own soul's mysteries—</span>
						<span>Bringing, truth out, clear-joyous, to my ken,</span>
						<span>Fair as the morn trampling the dull night. Then</span>
						<span>The lone hill-side shall hear exultant cries;</span>
						<span>The joyous see me joy, the weeping weep;</span>
						<span>The watching smile, as Death breathes on me his cold sleep.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">9.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I search my heart—I search, and find no faith.</span>
						<span>Hidden He may be in its many folds—</span>
						<span>I see him not revealed in all the world</span>
						<span>Duty's firm shape thins to a misty wraith.</span>
						<span>No good seems likely. To and fro I am hurled.</span>
						<span>I have no stay. Only obedience holds:—</span>
						<span>I haste, I rise, I do the thing he saith.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">10.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Thou wouldst not have thy man crushed back to clay;</span>
						<span>It must be, God, thou hast a strength to give</span>
						<span>To him that fain would do what thou dost say;</span>
						<span>Else how shall any soul repentant live,</span>
						<span>Old griefs and new fears hurrying on dismay?</span>
						<span>Let pain be what thou wilt, kind and degree,</span>
						<span>Only in pain calm thou my heart with thee.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">11.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I will not shift my ground like Moab's king,</span>
						<span>But from this spot whereon I stand, I pray—</span>
						<span>From this same barren rock to thee I say,</span>
						<span>"Lord, in my commonness, in this very thing</span>
						<span>That haunts my soul with folly—through the clay</span>
						<span>Of this my pitcher, see the lamp's dim flake;</span>
						<span>And hear the blow that would the pitcher break."</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">12.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Be thou the well by which I lie and rest;</span>
						<span>Be thou my tree of life, my garden ground;</span>
						<span>Be thou my home, my fire, my chamber blest,</span>
						<span>My book of wisdom, loved of all the best;</span>
						<span>Oh, be my friend, each day still newer found,</span>
						<span>As the eternal days and nights go round!</span>
						<span>Nay, nay—thou art my God, in whom all loves are bound!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">13.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Two things at once, thou know'st I cannot think.</span>
						<span>When busy with the work thou givest me,</span>
						<span>I cannot consciously think then of thee.</span>
						<span>Then why, when next thou lookest o'er the brink</span>
						<span>Of my horizon, should my spirit shrink,</span>
						<span>Reproached and fearful, nor to greet thee run?</span>
						<span>Can I be two when I am only one.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">14.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>My soul must unawares have sunk awry.</span>
						<span>Some care, poor eagerness, ambition of work,</span>
						<span>Some old offence that unforgiving did lurk,</span>
						<span>Or some self-gratulation, soft and sly—</span>
						<span>Something not thy sweet will, not the good part,</span>
						<span>While the home-guard looked out, stirred up the old murk,</span>
						<span>And so I gloomed away from thee, my Heart.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">15.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Therefore I make provision, ere I begin</span>
						<span>To do the thing thou givest me to do,</span>
						<span>Praying,—Lord, wake me oftener, lest I sin.</span>
						<span>Amidst my work, open thine eyes on me,</span>
						<span>That I may wake and laugh, and know and see</span>
						<span>Then with healed heart afresh catch up the clue,</span>
						<span>And singing drop into my work anew.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">16.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>If I should slow diverge, and listless stray</span>
						<span>Into some thought, feeling, or dream unright,</span>
						<span>O Watcher, my backsliding soul affray;</span>
						<span>Let me not perish of the ghastly blight.</span>
						<span>Be thou, O Life eternal, in me light;</span>
						<span>Then merest approach of selfish or impure</span>
						<span>Shall start me up alive, awake, secure.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">17.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Lord, I have fallen again—a human clod!</span>
						<span>Selfish I was, and heedless to offend;</span>
						<span>Stood on my rights. Thy own child would not send</span>
						<span>Away his shreds of nothing for the whole God!</span>
						<span>Wretched, to thee who savest, low I bend:</span>
						<span>Give me the power to let my rag-rights go</span>
						<span>In the great wind that from thy gulf doth blow.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">18.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Keep me from wrath, let it seem ever so right:</span>
						<span>My wrath will never work thy righteousness.</span>
						<span>Up, up the hill, to the whiter than snow-shine,</span>
						<span>Help me to climb, and dwell in pardon's light.</span>
						<span>I must be pure as thou, or ever less</span>
						<span>Than thy design of me—therefore incline</span>
						<span>My heart to take men's wrongs as thou tak'st mine.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">19.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Lord, in thy spirit's hurricane, I pray,</span>
						<span>Strip my soul naked—dress it then thy way.</span>
						<span>Change for me all my rags to cloth of gold.</span>
						<span>Who would not poverty for riches yield?</span>
						<span>A hovel sell to buy a treasure-field?</span>
						<span>Who would a mess of porridge careful hold</span>
						<span>Against the universe's birthright old?</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">20.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Help me to yield my will, in labour even,</span>
						<span>Nor toil on toil, greedy of doing, heap—</span>
						<span>Fretting I cannot more than me is given;</span>
						<span>That with the finest clay my wheel runs slow,</span>
						<span>Nor lets the lovely thing the shapely grow;</span>
						<span>That memory what thought gives it cannot keep,</span>
						<span>And nightly rimes ere morn like cistus-petals go.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">21.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>'Tis—shall thy will be done for me?—or mine,</span>
						<span>And I be made a thing not after thine—</span>
						<span>My own, and dear in paltriest details?</span>
						<span>Shall I be born of God, or of mere man?</span>
						<span>Be made like Christ, or on some other plan?—</span>
						<span>I let all run:—set thou and trim my sails;</span>
						<span>Home then my course, let blow whatever gales.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">22.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>With thee on board, each sailor is a king</span>
						<span>Nor I mere captain of my vessel then,</span>
						<span>But heir of earth and heaven, eternal child;</span>
						<span>Daring all truth, nor fearing anything;</span>
						<span>Mighty in love, the servant of all men;</span>
						<span>Resenting nothing, taking rage and blare</span>
						<span>Into the Godlike silence of a loving care.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">23.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I cannot see, my God, a reason why</span>
						<span>From morn to night I go not gladsome free;</span>
						<span>For, if thou art what my soul thinketh thee,</span>
						<span>There is no burden but should lightly lie,</span>
						<span>No duty but a joy at heart must be:</span>
						<span>Love's perfect will can be nor sore nor small,</span>
						<span>For God is light—in him no darkness is at all.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">24.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>'Tis something thus to think, and half to trust—</span>
						<span>But, ah! my very heart, God-born, should lie</span>
						<span>Spread to the light, clean, clear of mire and rust,</span>
						<span>And like a sponge drink the divine sunbeams.</span>
						<span>What resolution then, strong, swift, and high!</span>
						<span>What pure devotion, or to live or die!</span>
						<span>And in my sleep, what true, what perfect dreams!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">25.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>There is a misty twilight of the soul,</span>
						<span>A sickly eclipse, low brooding o'er a man,</span>
						<span>When the poor brain is as an empty bowl,</span>
						<span>And the thought-spirit, weariful and wan,</span>
						<span>Turning from that which yet it loves the best,</span>
						<span>Sinks moveless, with life-poverty opprest:—</span>
						<span>Watch then, O Lord, thy feebly glimmering coal.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">26.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I cannot think; in me is but a void;</span>
						<span>I have felt much, and want to feel no more;</span>
						<span>My soul is hungry for some poorer fare—</span>
						<span>Some earthly nectar, gold not unalloyed:—</span>
						<span>The little child that's happy to the core,</span>
						<span>Will leave his mother's lap, run down the stair,</span>
						<span>Play with the servants—is his mother annoyed?</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">27.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I would not have it so. Weary and worn,</span>
						<span>Why not to thee run straight, and be at rest?</span>
						<span>Motherward, with toy new, or garment torn,</span>
						<span>The child that late forsook her changeless breast,</span>
						<span>Runs to home's heart, the heaven that's heavenliest:</span>
						<span>In joy or sorrow, feebleness or might,</span>
						<span>Peace or commotion, be thou, Father, my delight.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">28.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>The thing I would say, still comes forth with doubt</span>
						<span>And difference:—is it that thou shap'st my ends?</span>
						<span>Or is it only the necessity</span>
						<span>Of stubborn words, that shift sluggish about,</span>
						<span>Warping my thought as it the sentence bends?—</span>
						<span>Have thou a part in it, O Lord, and I</span>
						<span>Shall say a truth, if not the thing I try.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">29.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Gather my broken fragments to a whole,</span>
						<span>As these four quarters make a shining day.</span>
						<span>Into thy basket, for my golden bowl,</span>
						<span>Take up the things that I have cast away</span>
						<span>In vice or indolence or unwise play.</span>
						<span>Let mine be a merry, all-receiving heart,</span>
						<span>But make it a whole, with light in every part.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</section>
			<section id="the-diary-of-an-old-soul-march">
				<header>
					<h3>March</h3>
				</header>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">1.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>THE song birds that come to me night and morn,</span>
						<span>Fly oft away and vanish if I sleep,</span>
						<span>Nor to my fowling-net will one return:</span>
						<span>Is the thing ever ours we cannot keep?—</span>
						<span>But their souls go not out into the deep.</span>
						<span>What matter if with changed song they come back?</span>
						<span>Old strength nor yet fresh beauty shall they lack.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">2.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Gloriously wasteful, O my Lord, art thou!</span>
						<span>Sunset faints after sunset into the night,</span>
						<span>Splendorously dying from thy window-sill—</span>
						<span>For ever. Sad our poverty doth bow</span>
						<span>Before the riches of thy making might:</span>
						<span>Sweep from thy space thy systems at thy will—</span>
						<span>In thee the sun sets every sunset still.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">3.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>And in the perfect time, O perfect God,</span>
						<span>When we are in our home, our natal home,</span>
						<span>When joy shall carry every sacred load,</span>
						<span>And from its life and peace no heart shall roam,</span>
						<span>What if thou make us able to make like thee—</span>
						<span>To light with moons, to clothe with greenery,</span>
						<span>To hang gold sunsets o'er a rose and purple sea!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">4.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Then to his neighbour one may call out, "Come!</span>
						<span>Brother, come hither—I would show you a thing;"</span>
						<span>And lo, a vision of his imagining,</span>
						<span>Informed of thought which else had rested dumb,</span>
						<span>Before the neighbour's truth-delighted eyes,</span>
						<span>In the great æther of existence rise,</span>
						<span>And two hearts each to each the closer cling!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">5.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>We make, but thou art the creating core.</span>
						<span>Whatever thing I dream, invent, or feel,</span>
						<span>Thou art the heart of it, the atmosphere.</span>
						<span>Thou art inside all love man ever bore;</span>
						<span>Yea, the love itself, whatever thing be dear.</span>
						<span>Man calls his dog, he follows at his heel,</span>
						<span>Because thou first art love, self-caused, essential, mere.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">6.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>This day be with me, Lord, when I go forth,</span>
						<span>Be nearer to me than I am able to ask.</span>
						<span>In merriment, in converse, or in task,</span>
						<span>Walking the street, listening to men of worth,</span>
						<span>Or greeting such as only talk and bask,</span>
						<span>Be thy thought still my waiting soul around,</span>
						<span>And if He come, I shall be watching found.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">7.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>What if, writing, I always seem to leave</span>
						<span>Some better thing, or better way, behind,</span>
						<span>Why should I therefore fret at all, or grieve!</span>
						<span>The worse I drop, that I the better find;</span>
						<span>The best is only in thy perfect mind.</span>
						<span>Fallen threads I will not search for—I will weave.</span>
						<span>Who makes the mill-wheel backward strike to grind!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">8.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Be with me, Lord. Keep me beyond all prayers:</span>
						<span>For more than all my prayers my need of thee,</span>
						<span>And thou beyond all need, all unknown cares;</span>
						<span>What the heart's dear imagination dares,</span>
						<span>Thou dost transcend in measureless majesty</span>
						<span>All prayers in one—my God, be unto me</span>
						<span>Thy own eternal self, absolutely.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">9.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Where should the unknown treasures of the truth</span>
						<span>Lie, but there whence the truth comes out the most—</span>
						<span>In the Son of man, folded in love and ruth?</span>
						<span>Fair shore we see, fair ocean; but behind</span>
						<span>Lie infinite reaches bathing many a coast—</span>
						<span>The human thought of the eternal mind,</span>
						<span>Pulsed by a living tide, blown by a living wind.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">10.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Thou, healthful Father, art the Ancient of Days,</span>
						<span>And Jesus is the eternal youth of thee.</span>
						<span>Our old age is the scorching of the bush</span>
						<span>By life's indwelling, incorruptible blaze.</span>
						<span>O Life, burn at this feeble shell of me,</span>
						<span>Till I the sore singed garment off shall push,</span>
						<span>Flap out my Psyche wings, and to thee rush.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">11.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>But shall I then rush to thee like a dart?</span>
						<span>Or lie long hours æonian yet betwixt</span>
						<span>This hunger in me, and the Father's heart?—</span>
						<span>It shall be good, how ever, and not ill;</span>
						<span>Of things and thoughts even now thou art my next;</span>
						<span>Sole neighbour, and no space between, thou art—</span>
						<span>And yet art drawing nearer, nearer still.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">12.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Therefore, my brothers, therefore, sisters dear,</span>
						<span>However I, troubled or selfish, fail</span>
						<span>In tenderness, or grace, or service clear,</span>
						<span>I every moment draw to you more near;</span>
						<span>God in us from our hearts veil after veil</span>
						<span>Keeps lifting, till we see with his own sight,</span>
						<span>And all together run in unity's delight.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">13.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I love thee, Lord, for very greed of love—</span>
						<span>Not of the precious streams that towards me move,</span>
						<span>But of the indwelling, outgoing, fountain store.</span>
						<span>Than mine, oh, many an ignorant heart loves more!</span>
						<span>Therefore the more, with Mary at thy feet,</span>
						<span>I must sit worshipping—that, in my core,</span>
						<span>Thy words may fan to a flame the low primeval heat.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">14.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Oh my beloved, gone to heaven from me!</span>
						<span>I would be rich in love to heap you with love;</span>
						<span>I long to love you, sweet ones, perfectly—</span>
						<span>Like God, who sees no spanning vault above,</span>
						<span>No earth below, and feels no circling air—</span>
						<span>Infinitely, no boundary anywhere.</span>
						<span>I am a beast until I love as God doth love.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">15.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Ah, say not, 'tis but perfect self I want</span>
						<span>But if it were, that self is fit to live</span>
						<span>Whose perfectness is still itself to scant,</span>
						<span>Which never longs to have, but still to give.</span>
						<span>A self I must have, or not be at all:</span>
						<span>Love, give me a self self-giving—or let me fall</span>
						<span>To endless darkness back, and free me from life's thrall.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">16.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>"Back," said I! Whither back? How to the dark?</span>
						<span>From no dark came I, but the depths of light;</span>
						<span>From the sun-heart I came, of love a spark:</span>
						<span>What should I do but love with all my might?</span>
						<span>To die of love severe and pure and stark,</span>
						<span>Were scarcely loss; to lord a loveless height—</span>
						<span>That were a living death, damnation's positive night.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">17.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>But love is life. To die of love is then</span>
						<span>The only pass to higher life than this.</span>
						<span>All love is death to loving, living men;</span>
						<span>All deaths are leaps across clefts to the abyss.</span>
						<span>Our life is the broken current, Lord, of thine,</span>
						<span>Flashing from morn to morn with conscious shine—</span>
						<span>Then first by willing death self-made, then life divine.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">18.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I love you, my sweet children, who are gone</span>
						<span>Into another mansion; but I know</span>
						<span>I love you not as I shall love you yet.</span>
						<span>I love you, sweet dead children; there are none</span>
						<span>In the land to which ye vanished to go,</span>
						<span>Whose hearts more truly on your hearts are set—</span>
						<span>Yet should I die of grief to love you only so.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">19.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>"I am but as a beast before thee, Lord."—</span>
						<span>Great poet-king, I thank thee for the word.—</span>
						<span>Leave not thy son half-made in beastly guise—</span>
						<span>Less than a man, with more than human cries—</span>
						<span>An unshaped thing in which thyself cries out!</span>
						<span>Finish me, Father; now I am but a doubt;</span>
						<span>Oh! make thy moaning thing for joy to leap and shout.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">20.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Let my soul talk to thee in ordered words,</span>
						<span>O king of kings, O lord of only lords!—</span>
						<span>When I am thinking thee within my heart,</span>
						<span>From the broken reflex be not far apart.</span>
						<span>The troubled water, dim with upstirred soil,</span>
						<span>Makes not the image which it yet can spoil:—</span>
						<span>Come nearer, Lord, and smooth the wrinkled coil.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">21.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>O Lord, when I do think of my departed,</span>
						<span>I think of thee who art the death of parting;</span>
						<span>Of him who crying Father breathed his last,</span>
						<span>Then radiant from the sepulchre upstarted.—</span>
						<span>Even then, I think, thy hands and feet kept smarting:</span>
						<span>With us the bitterness of death is past,</span>
						<span>But by the feet he still doth hold us fast.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">22.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Therefore our hands thy feet do hold as fast.</span>
						<span>We pray not to be spared the sorest pang,</span>
						<span>But only—be thou with us to the last.</span>
						<span>Let not our heart be troubled at the clang</span>
						<span>Of hammer and nails, nor dread the spear's keen fang,</span>
						<span>Nor the ghast sickening that comes of pain,</span>
						<span>Nor yet the last clutch of the banished brain.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">23.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Lord, pity us: we have no making power;</span>
						<span>Then give us making will, adopting thine.</span>
						<span>Make, make, and make us; temper, and refine.</span>
						<span>Be in us patience—neither to start nor cower.</span>
						<span>Christ, if thou be not with us—not by sign,</span>
						<span>But presence, actual as the wounds that bleed—</span>
						<span>We shall not bear it, but shall die indeed.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">24.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>O Christ, have pity on all men when they come</span>
						<span>Unto the border haunted of dismay;</span>
						<span>When that they know not draweth very near—</span>
						<span>The other thing, the opposite of day,</span>
						<span>Formless and ghastly, sick, and gaping-dumb,</span>
						<span>Before which even love doth lose his cheer:</span>
						<span>O radiant Christ, remember then thy fear.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">25.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Be by me, Lord, this day. Thou know'st I mean—</span>
						<span>Lord, make me mind thee. I herewith forestall</span>
						<span>My own forgetfulness, when I stoop to glean</span>
						<span>The corn of earth—which yet thy hand lets fall.</span>
						<span>Be for me then against myself. Oh lean</span>
						<span>Over me then when I invert my cup;</span>
						<span>Take me, if by the hair, and lift me up.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">26.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Lord of essential life, help me to die.</span>
						<span>To will to die is one with highest life,</span>
						<span>The mightiest act that to Will's hand doth lie—</span>
						<span>Born of God's essence, and of man's hard strife:</span>
						<span>God, give me strength my evil self to kill,</span>
						<span>And die into the heaven of thy pure will.—</span>
						<span>Then shall this body's death be very tolerable.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">27.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>As to our mothers came help in our birth—</span>
						<span>Not lost in lifing us, but saved and blest—</span>
						<span>Self bearing self, although right sorely prest,</span>
						<span>Shall nothing lose, but die and be at rest</span>
						<span>In life eternal, beyond all care and dearth.</span>
						<span>God-born then truly, a man does no more ill,</span>
						<span>Perfectly loves, and has whate'er he will.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">28.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>As our dear animals do suffer less</span>
						<span>Because their pain spreads neither right nor left,</span>
						<span>Lost in oblivion and foresightlessness—</span>
						<span>Our suffering sore by faith shall be bereft</span>
						<span>Of all dismay, and every weak excess.</span>
						<span>His presence shall be better in our pain,</span>
						<span>Than even self-absence to the weaker brain.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">29.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>"Father, let this cup pass." He prayed—was heard.</span>
						<span>What cup was it that passed away from him?</span>
						<span>Sure not the death-cup, now filled to the brim!</span>
						<span>There was no quailing in the awful word;</span>
						<span>He still was king of kings, of lords the lord:—</span>
						<span>He feared lest, in the suffering waste and grim,</span>
						<span>His faith might grow too faint and sickly dim.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">30.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Thy mind, my master, I will dare explore;</span>
						<span>What we are told, that we are meant to know.</span>
						<span>Into thy soul I search yet more and more,</span>
						<span>Led by the lamp of my desire and woe.</span>
						<span>If thee, my Lord, I may not understand,</span>
						<span>I am a wanderer in a houseless land,</span>
						<span>A weeping thirst by hot winds ever fanned.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">31.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Therefore I look again—and think I see</span>
						<span>That, when at last he did cry out, "My God,</span>
						<span>Why hast thou me forsaken?" straight man's rod</span>
						<span>Was turned aside; for, that same moment, he</span>
						<span>Cried "Father!" and gave up will and breath and spirit</span>
						<span>Into his hands whose all he did inherit—</span>
						<span>Delivered, glorified eternally.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</section>
			<section id="the-diary-of-an-old-soul-april">
				<header>
					<h3>April</h3>
				</header>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">1.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>LORD, I do choose the higher than my will.</span>
						<span>I would be handled by thy nursing arms</span>
						<span>After thy will, not my infant alarms.</span>
						<span>Hurt me thou wilt—but then more loving still,</span>
						<span>If more can be and less, in love's perfect zone!</span>
						<span>My fancy shrinks from least of all thy harms,</span>
						<span>But do thy will with me—I am thine own.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">2.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Some things wilt thou not one day turn to dreams?</span>
						<span>Some dreams wilt thou not one day turn to fact?</span>
						<span>The thing that painful, more than should be, seems,</span>
						<span>Shall not thy sliding years with them retract—</span>
						<span>Shall fair realities not counteract?</span>
						<span>The thing that was well dreamed of bliss and joy—</span>
						<span>Wilt thou not breathe thy life into the toy?</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">3.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I have had dreams of absolute delight,</span>
						<span>Beyond all waking bliss—only of grass,</span>
						<span>Flowers, wind, a peak, a limb of marble white;</span>
						<span>They dwell with me like things half come to pass,</span>
						<span>True prophecies:—when I with thee am right,</span>
						<span>If I pray, waking, for such a joy of sight,</span>
						<span>Thou with the gold, wilt not refuse the brass.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">4.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I think I shall not ever pray for such;</span>
						<span>Thy bliss will overflood my heart and brain,</span>
						<span>And I want no unripe things back again.</span>
						<span>Love ever fresher, lovelier than of old—</span>
						<span>How should it want its more exchanged for much?</span>
						<span>Love will not backward sigh, but forward strain,</span>
						<span>On in the tale still telling, never told.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">5.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>What has been, shall not only be, but is.</span>
						<span>The hues of dreamland, strange and sweet and tender</span>
						<span>Are but hint-shadows of full many a splendour</span>
						<span>Which the high Parent-love will yet unroll</span>
						<span>Before his child's obedient, humble soul.</span>
						<span>Ah, me, my God! in thee lies every bliss</span>
						<span>Whose shadow men go hunting wearily amiss.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">6.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Now, ere I sleep, I wonder what I shall dream.</span>
						<span>Some sense of being, utter new, may come</span>
						<span>Into my soul while I am blind and dumb—</span>
						<span>With shapes and airs and scents which dark hours teem,</span>
						<span>Of other sort than those that haunt the day,</span>
						<span>Hinting at precious things, ages away</span>
						<span>In the long tale of us God to himself doth say.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">7.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Late, in a dream, an unknown lady I saw</span>
						<span>Stand on a tomb; down she to me stepped thence.</span>
						<span>"They tell me," quoth I, "thou art one of the dead!"</span>
						<span>And scarce believed for gladness the yea she said;</span>
						<span>A strange auroral bliss, an arctic awe,</span>
						<span>A new, outworldish joy awoke intense,</span>
						<span>To think I talked with one that verily was dead.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">8.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Thou dost demand our love, holy Lord Christ,</span>
						<span>And batest nothing of thy modesty;—</span>
						<span>Thou know'st no other way to bliss the highest</span>
						<span>Than loving thee, the loving, perfectly.</span>
						<span>Thou lovest perfectly—that is thy bliss:</span>
						<span>We must love like thee, or our being miss—</span>
						<span>So, to love perfectly, love perfect Love, love thee.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">9.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Here is my heart, O Christ; thou know'st I love thee.</span>
						<span>But wretched is the thing I call my love.</span>
						<span>O Love divine, rise up in me and move me—</span>
						<span>I follow surely when thou first dost move.</span>
						<span>To love the perfect love, is primal, mere</span>
						<span>Necessity; and he who holds life dear,</span>
						<span>Must love thee every hope and heart above.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">10.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Might I but scatter interfering things—</span>
						<span>Questions and doubts, distrusts and anxious pride,</span>
						<span>And in thy garment, as under gathering wings,</span>
						<span>Nestle obedient to thy loving side,</span>
						<span>Easy it were to love thee. But when thou</span>
						<span>Send'st me to think and labour from thee wide,</span>
						<span>Love falls to asking many a why and how.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">11.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Easier it were, but poorer were the love.</span>
						<span>Lord, I would have me love thee from the deeps—</span>
						<span>Of troubled thought, of pain, of weariness.</span>
						<span>Through seething wastes below, billows above,</span>
						<span>My soul should rise in eager, hungering leaps;</span>
						<span>Through thorny thicks, through sands unstable press—</span>
						<span>Out of my dream to him who slumbers not nor sleeps.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">12.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I do not fear the greatness of thy command—</span>
						<span>To keep heart-open-house to brother men;</span>
						<span>But till in thy God's love perfect I stand,</span>
						<span>My door not wide enough will open. Then</span>
						<span>Each man will be love-awful in my sight;</span>
						<span>And, open to the eternal morning's might,</span>
						<span>Each human face will shine my window for thy light.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">13.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Make me all patience and all diligence;</span>
						<span>Patience, that thou mayst have thy time with me;</span>
						<span>Diligence, that I waste not thy expense</span>
						<span>In sending out to bring me home to thee.</span>
						<span>What though thy work in me transcends my sense—</span>
						<span>Too fine, too high, for me to understand—</span>
						<span>I hope entirely. On, Lord, with thy labour grand.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">14.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Lest I be humbled at the last, and told</span>
						<span>That my great labour was but for my peace</span>
						<span>That not for love or truth had I been bold,</span>
						<span>But merely for a prisoned heart's release;</span>
						<span>Careful, I humble me now before thy feet:</span>
						<span>Whate'er I be, I cry, and will not cease—</span>
						<span>Let me not perish, though favour be not meet.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">15.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>For, what I seek thou knowest I must find,</span>
						<span>Or miserably die for lack of love.</span>
						<span>I justify thee: what is in thy mind,</span>
						<span>If it be shame to me, all shame above.</span>
						<span>Thou know'st I choose it—know'st I would not shove</span>
						<span>The hand away that stripped me for the rod—</span>
						<span>If so it pleased my Life, my love-made-angry God.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">16.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I see a door, a multitude near by,</span>
						<span>In creed and quarrel, sure disciples all!</span>
						<span>Gladly they would, they say, enter the hall,</span>
						<span>But cannot, the stone threshold is so high.</span>
						<span>From unseen hand, full many a feeding crumb,</span>
						<span>Slow dropping o'er the threshold high doth come:</span>
						<span>They gather and eat, with much disputing hum.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">17.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Still and anon, a loud clear voice doth call—</span>
						<span>"Make your feet clean, and enter so the hall."</span>
						<span>They hear, they stoop, they gather each a crumb.</span>
						<span>Oh the deaf people! would they were also dumb!</span>
						<span>Hear how they talk, and lack of Christ deplore,</span>
						<span>Stamping with muddy feet about the door,</span>
						<span>And will not wipe them clean to walk upon his floor!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">18.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>But see, one comes; he listens to the voice;</span>
						<span>Careful he wipes his weary dusty feet!</span>
						<span>The voice hath spoken—to him is left no choice;</span>
						<span>He hurries to obey—that only is meet.</span>
						<span>Low sinks the threshold, levelled with the ground;</span>
						<span>The man leaps in—to liberty he's bound.</span>
						<span>The rest go talking, walking, picking round.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">19.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>If I, thus writing, rebuke my neighbour dull,</span>
						<span>And talk, and write, and enter not the door,</span>
						<span>Than all the rest I wrong Christ tenfold more,</span>
						<span>Making his gift of vision void and null.</span>
						<span>Help me this day to be thy humble sheep,</span>
						<span>Eating thy grass, and following, thou before;</span>
						<span>From wolfish lies my life, O Shepherd, keep.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">20.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>God, help me, dull of heart, to trust in thee.</span>
						<span>Thou art the father of me—not any mood</span>
						<span>Can part me from the One, the verily Good.</span>
						<span>When fog and failure o'er my being brood.</span>
						<span>When life looks but a glimmering marshy clod,</span>
						<span>No fire out flashing from the living God—</span>
						<span>Then, then, to rest in faith were worthy victory!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">21.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>To trust is gain and growth, not mere sown seed!</span>
						<span>Faith heaves the world round to the heavenly dawn,</span>
						<span>In whose great light the soul doth spell and read</span>
						<span>Itself high-born, its being derived and drawn</span>
						<span>From the eternal self-existent fire;</span>
						<span>Then, mazed with joy of its own heavenly breed,</span>
						<span>Exultant-humble falls before its awful sire.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">22.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Art thou not, Jesus, busy like to us?</span>
						<span>Thee shall I image as one sitting still,</span>
						<span>Ordering all things in thy potent will,</span>
						<span>Silent, and thinking ever to thy father,</span>
						<span>Whose thought through thee flows multitudinous?</span>
						<span>Or shall I think of thee as journeying, rather,</span>
						<span>Ceaseless through space, because thou everything dost fill?</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">23.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>That all things thou dost fill, I well may think—</span>
						<span>Thy power doth reach me in so many ways.</span>
						<span>Thou who in one the universe dost bind,</span>
						<span>Passest through all the channels of my mind;</span>
						<span>The sun of thought, across the farthest brink</span>
						<span>Of consciousness thou sendest me thy rays;</span>
						<span>Nor drawest them in when lost in sleep I sink.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">24.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>So common are thy paths, thy coming seems</span>
						<span>Only another phase oft of my me;</span>
						<span>But nearer is my I, O Lord, to thee,</span>
						<span>Than is my I to what itself it deems;</span>
						<span>How better then couldst thou, O master, come,</span>
						<span>Than from thy home across into my home,</span>
						<span>Straight o'er the marches that I cannot see!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">25.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Marches?—'Twixt thee and me there's no division,</span>
						<span>Except the meeting of thy will and mine,</span>
						<span>The loves that love, the wills that will the same.</span>
						<span>Where thine meets mine is my life's true condition;</span>
						<span>Yea, only there it burns with any flame.</span>
						<span>Thy will but holds me to my life's fruition.</span>
						<span>O God, I would—I have no mine that is not thine.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">26.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I look for thee, and do not see thee come.—</span>
						<span>If I could see thee, 'twere a commoner thing,</span>
						<span>And shallower comfort would thy coming bring.</span>
						<span>Earth, sea, and air lie round me moveless dumb,</span>
						<span>Never a tremble, an expectant hum,</span>
						<span>To tell the Lord of Hearts is drawing near:</span>
						<span>Lo! in the looking eyes, the looked for Lord is here.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">27.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I take a comfort from my very badness:</span>
						<span>It is for lack of thee that I am bad.</span>
						<span>How close, how infinitely closer yet</span>
						<span>Must I come to thee, ere I can pay one debt</span>
						<span>Which mere humanity has on me set!</span>
						<span>"How close to thee!"—no wonder, soul, thou art glad!</span>
						<span>Oneness with him is the eternal gladness.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">28.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>What can there be so close as making and made?</span>
						<span>Nought twinned can be so near; thou art more nigh</span>
						<span>To me, my God, than is this thinking I</span>
						<span>To that I mean when I by me is said;</span>
						<span>Thou art more near me, than is my ready will</span>
						<span>Near to my love, though both one place do fill;—</span>
						<span>Yet, till we are one,—Ah me! the long until!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">29.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Then shall my heart behold thee everywhere.</span>
						<span>The vision rises of a speechless thing,</span>
						<span>A perfectness of bliss beyond compare!</span>
						<span>A time when I nor breathe nor think nor move,</span>
						<span>But I do breathe and think and feel thy love,</span>
						<span>The soul of all the songs the saints do sing!—</span>
						<span>And life dies out in bliss, to come again in prayer.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">30.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>In the great glow of that great love, this death</span>
						<span>Would melt away like a fantastic cloud;</span>
						<span>I should no more shrink from it than from the breath</span>
						<span>That makes in the frosty air a nimbus-shroud;</span>
						<span>Thou, Love, hast conquered death, and I aloud</span>
						<span>Should triumph over him, with thy saintly crowd,</span>
						<span>That where the Lamb goes ever followeth.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</section>
			<section id="the-diary-of-an-old-soul-may">
				<header>
					<h3>May</h3>
				</header>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">1.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>WHAT though my words glance sideways from the thing</span>
						<span>Which I would utter in thine ear, my sire!</span>
						<span>Truth in the inward parts thou dost desire—</span>
						<span>Wise hunger, not a fitness fine of speech:</span>
						<span>The little child that clamouring fails to reach</span>
						<span>With upstretched hand the fringe of her attire,</span>
						<span>Yet meets the mother's hand down hurrying.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">2.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Even when their foolish words they turned on him,</span>
						<span>He did not his disciples send away;</span>
						<span>He knew their hearts were foolish, eyes were dim,</span>
						<span>And therefore by his side needs must they stay.</span>
						<span>Thou will not, Lord, send me away from thee.</span>
						<span>When I am foolish, make thy cock crow grim;</span>
						<span>If that is not enough, turn, Lord, and look on me.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">3.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Another day of gloom and slanting rain!</span>
						<span>Of closed skies, cold winds, and blight and bane!</span>
						<span>Such not the weather, Lord, which thou art fain</span>
						<span>To give thy chosen, sweet to heart and brain!—</span>
						<span>Until we mourn, thou keep'st the merry tune;</span>
						<span>Thy hand unloved its pleasure must restrain,</span>
						<span>Nor spoil both gift and child by lavishing too soon.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">4.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>But all things shall be ours! Up, heart, and sing.</span>
						<span>All things were made for us—we are God's heirs—</span>
						<span>Moon, sun, and wildest comets that do trail</span>
						<span>A crowd of small worlds for a swiftness-tail!</span>
						<span>Up from Thy depths in me, my child-heart bring—</span>
						<span>The child alone inherits anything:</span>
						<span>God's little children-gods—all things are theirs!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">5.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Thy great deliverance is a greater thing</span>
						<span>Than purest imagination can foregrasp;</span>
						<span>A thing beyond all conscious hungering,</span>
						<span>Beyond all hope that makes the poet sing.</span>
						<span>It takes the clinging world, undoes its clasp,</span>
						<span>Floats it afar upon a mighty sea,</span>
						<span>And leaves us quiet with love and liberty and thee.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">6.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Through all the fog, through all earth's wintery sighs,</span>
						<span>I scent Thy spring, I feel the eternal air,</span>
						<span>Warm, soft, and dewy, filled with flowery eyes,</span>
						<span>And gentle, murmuring motions everywhere—</span>
						<span>Of life in heart, and tree, and brook, and moss;</span>
						<span>Thy breath wakes beauty, love, and bliss, and prayer,</span>
						<span>And strength to hang with nails upon thy cross.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">7.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>If thou hadst closed my life in seed and husk,</span>
						<span>And cast me into soft, warm, damp, dark mould,</span>
						<span>All unaware of light come through the dusk,</span>
						<span>I yet should feel the split of each shelly fold,</span>
						<span>Should feel the growing of my prisoned heart,</span>
						<span>And dully dream of being slow unrolled,</span>
						<span>And in some other vagueness taking part.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">8.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>And little as the world I should foreknow</span>
						<span>Up into which I was about to rise—</span>
						<span>Its rains, its radiance, airs, and warmth, and skies,</span>
						<span>How it would greet me, how its wind would blow—</span>
						<span>As little, it may be, I do know the good</span>
						<span>Which I for years half darkling have pursued—</span>
						<span>The second birth for which my nature cries.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">9.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>The life that knows not, patient waits, nor longs:—</span>
						<span>I know, and would be patient, yet would long.</span>
						<span>I can be patient for all coming songs,</span>
						<span>But let me sing my one monotonous song.</span>
						<span>To me the time is slow my mould among;</span>
						<span>To quicker life I fain would spur and start</span>
						<span>The aching growth at my dull-swelling heart.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">10.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Christ is the pledge that I shall one day see;</span>
						<span>That one day, still with him, I shall awake,</span>
						<span>And know my God, at one with him and free.</span>
						<span>O lordly essence, come to life in me;</span>
						<span>The will-throb let me feel that doth me make;</span>
						<span>Now have I many a mighty hope in thee,</span>
						<span>Then shall I rest although the universe should quake.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">11.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Haste to me, Lord, when this fool-heart of mine</span>
						<span>Begins to gnaw itself with selfish craving;</span>
						<span>Or, like a foul thing scarcely worth the saving,</span>
						<span>Swoln up with wrath, desireth vengeance fine.</span>
						<span>Haste, Lord, to help, when reason favours wrong;</span>
						<span>Haste when thy soul, the high-born thing divine,</span>
						<span>Is torn by passion's raving, maniac throng.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">12.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Fair freshness of the God-breathed spirit air,</span>
						<span>Pass through my soul, and make it strong to love;</span>
						<span>Wither with gracious cold what demons dare</span>
						<span>Shoot from my hell into my world above;</span>
						<span>Let them drop down, like leaves the sun doth sear,</span>
						<span>And flutter far into the inane and bare,</span>
						<span>Leaving my middle-earth calm, wise, and clear.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">13.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Even thou canst give me neither thought nor thing,</span>
						<span>Were it the priceless pearl hid in the land,</span>
						<span>Which, if I fix thereon a greedy gaze,</span>
						<span>Becomes not poison that doth burn and cling;</span>
						<span>Their own bad look my foolish eyes doth daze,</span>
						<span>They see the gift, see not the giving hand—</span>
						<span>From the living root the apple dead I wring.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">14.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>This versing, even the reading of the tale</span>
						<span>That brings my heart its joy unspeakable,</span>
						<span>Sometimes will softly, unsuspectedly hale</span>
						<span>That heart from thee, and all its pulses quell.</span>
						<span>Discovery's pride, joy's bliss, take aback my sail,</span>
						<span>And sweep me from thy presence and my grace,</span>
						<span>Because my eyes dropped from the master's face.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">15.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Afresh I seek thee. Lead me—once more I pray—</span>
						<span>Even should it be against my will, thy way.</span>
						<span>Let me not feel thee foreign any hour,</span>
						<span>Or shrink from thee as an estranged power.</span>
						<span>Through doubt, through faith, through bliss, through stark dismay,</span>
						<span>Through sunshine, wind, or snow, or fog, or shower,</span>
						<span>Draw me to thee who art my only day.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">16.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I would go near thee—but I cannot press</span>
						<span>Into thy presence—it helps not to presume.</span>
						<span>Thy doors are deeds; the handles are their doing.</span>
						<span>He whose day-life is obedient righteousness,</span>
						<span>Who, after failure, or a poor success,</span>
						<span>Rises up, stronger effort yet renewing—</span>
						<span>He finds thee, Lord, at length, in his own common room.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">17.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Lord, thou hast carried me through this evening's duty;</span>
						<span>I am released, weary, and well content.</span>
						<span>O soul, put on the evening dress of beauty,</span>
						<span>Thy sunset-flush, of gold and purple blent!—</span>
						<span>Alas, the moment I turn to my heart,</span>
						<span>Feeling runs out of doors, or stands apart!</span>
						<span>But such as I am, Lord, take me as thou art.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">18.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>The word he then did speak, fits now as then,</span>
						<span>For the same kind of men doth mock at it.</span>
						<span>God-fools, God-drunkards these do call the men</span>
						<span>Who think the poverty of their all not fit,</span>
						<span>Borne humbly by their art, their voice, their pen,</span>
						<span>Save for its allness, at thy feet to fling,</span>
						<span>For whom all is unfit that is not everything.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">19.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>O Christ, my life, possess me utterly.</span>
						<span>Take me and make a little Christ of me.</span>
						<span>If I am anything but thy father's son,</span>
						<span>'Tis something not yet from the darkness won.</span>
						<span>Oh, give me light to live with open eyes.</span>
						<span>Oh, give me life to hope above all skies.</span>
						<span>Give me thy spirit to haunt the Father with my cries.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">20.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>'Tis hard for man to rouse his spirit up—</span>
						<span>It is the human creative agony,</span>
						<span>Though but to hold the heart an empty cup,</span>
						<span>Or tighten on the team the rigid rein.</span>
						<span>Many will rather lie among the slain</span>
						<span>Than creep through narrow ways the light to gain—</span>
						<span>Than wake the will, and be born bitterly.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">21.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>But he who would be born again indeed,</span>
						<span>Must wake his soul unnumbered times a day,</span>
						<span>And urge himself to life with holy greed;</span>
						<span>Now ope his bosom to the Wind's free play;</span>
						<span>And now, with patience forceful, hard, lie still,</span>
						<span>Submiss and ready to the making will,</span>
						<span>Athirst and empty, for God's breath to fill.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">22.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>All times are thine whose will is our remede.</span>
						<span>Man turns to thee, thou hast not turned away;</span>
						<span>The look he casts, thy labour that did breed—</span>
						<span>It is thy work, thy business all the day:</span>
						<span>That look, not foregone fitness, thou dost heed.</span>
						<span>For duty absolute how be fitter than now?</span>
						<span>Or learn by shunning?—Lord, I come; help thou.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">23.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Ever above my coldness and my doubt</span>
						<span>Rises up something, reaching forth a hand:</span>
						<span>This thing I know, but cannot understand.</span>
						<span>Is it the God in me that rises out</span>
						<span>Beyond my self, trailing it up with him,</span>
						<span>Towards the spirit-home, the freedom-land,</span>
						<span>Beyond my conscious ken, my near horizon's brim?</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">24.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>O God of man, my heart would worship all</span>
						<span>My fellow men, the flashes from thy fire;</span>
						<span>Them in good sooth my lofty kindred call,</span>
						<span>Born of the same one heart, the perfect sire;</span>
						<span>Love of my kind alone can set me free;</span>
						<span>Help me to welcome all that come to me,</span>
						<span>Not close my doors and dream solitude liberty!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">25.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>A loving word may set some door ajar</span>
						<span>Where seemed no door, and that may enter in</span>
						<span>Which lay at the heart of that same loving word.</span>
						<span>In my still chamber dwell thou always, Lord;</span>
						<span>Thy presence there will carriage true afford;</span>
						<span>True words will flow, pure of design to win;</span>
						<span>And to my men my door shall have no bar.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">26.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>My prayers, my God, flow from what I am not;</span>
						<span>I think thy answers make me what I am.</span>
						<span>Like weary waves thought follows upon thought,</span>
						<span>But the still depth beneath is all thine own,</span>
						<span>And there thou mov'st in paths to us unknown.</span>
						<span>Out of strange strife thy peace is strangely wrought;</span>
						<span>If the lion in us pray—thou answerest the lamb.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">27.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>So bound in selfishness am I, so chained,</span>
						<span>I know it must be glorious to be free</span>
						<span>But know not what, full-fraught, the word doth mean.</span>
						<span>By loss on loss I have severely gained</span>
						<span>Wisdom enough my slavery to see;</span>
						<span>But liberty, pure, absolute, serene,</span>
						<span>No freëst-visioned slave has ever seen.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">28.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>For, that great freedom how should such as I</span>
						<span>Be able to imagine in such a self?</span>
						<span>Less hopeless far the miser man might try</span>
						<span>To image the delight of friend-shared pelf.</span>
						<span>Freedom is to be like thee, face and heart;</span>
						<span>To know it, Lord, I must be as thou art,</span>
						<span>I cannot breed the imagination high.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">29.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Yet hints come to me from the realm unknown;</span>
						<span>Airs drift across the twilight border land,</span>
						<span>Odoured with life; and as from some far strand</span>
						<span>Sea-murmured, whispers to my heart are blown</span>
						<span>That fill me with a joy I cannot speak,</span>
						<span>Yea, from whose shadow words drop faint and weak:</span>
						<span>Thee, God, I shadow in that region grand.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">30.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>O Christ, who didst appear in Judah land,</span>
						<span>Thence by the cross go back to God's right hand,</span>
						<span>Plain history, and things our sense beyond,</span>
						<span>In thee together come and correspond:</span>
						<span>How rulest thou from the undiscovered bourne</span>
						<span>The world-wise world that laughs thee still to scorn?</span>
						<span>Please, Lord, let thy disciple understand.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">31.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>'Tis heart on heart thou rulest. Thou art the same</span>
						<span>At God's right hand as here exposed to shame,</span>
						<span>And therefore workest now as thou didst then—</span>
						<span>Feeding the faint divine in humble men.</span>
						<span>Through all thy realms from thee goes out heart-power,</span>
						<span>Working the holy, satisfying hour,</span>
						<span>When all shall love, and all be loved again.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</section>
			<section id="the-diary-of-an-old-soul-june">
				<header>
					<h3>June</h3>
				</header>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">1.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>FROM thine, as then, the healing virtue goes</span>
						<span>Into our hearts—that is the Father's plan.</span>
						<span>From heart to heart it sinks, it steals, it flows,</span>
						<span>From these that know thee still infecting those.</span>
						<span>Here is my heart—from thine, Lord, fill it up,</span>
						<span>That I may offer it as the holy cup</span>
						<span>Of thy communion to my every man.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">2.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>When thou dost send out whirlwinds on thy seas,</span>
						<span>Alternatest thy lightning with its roar,</span>
						<span>Thy night with morning, and thy clouds with stars</span>
						<span>Or, mightier force unseen in midst of these,</span>
						<span>Orderest the life in every airy pore;</span>
						<span>Guidest men's efforts, rul'st mishaps and jars,—</span>
						<span>'Tis only for their hearts, and nothing more.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">3.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>This, this alone thy father careth for—</span>
						<span>That men should live hearted throughout with thee—</span>
						<span>Because the simple, only life thou art,</span>
						<span>Of the very truth of living, the pure heart.</span>
						<span>For this, deep waters whelm the fruitful lea,</span>
						<span>Wars ravage, famine wastes, plague withers, nor</span>
						<span>Shall cease till men have chosen the better part.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">4.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>But, like a virtuous medicine, self-diffused</span>
						<span>Through all men's hearts thy love shall sink and float;</span>
						<span>Till every feeling false, and thought unwise,</span>
						<span>Selfish, and seeking, shall, sternly disused,</span>
						<span>Wither, and die, and shrivel up to nought;</span>
						<span>And Christ, whom they did hang 'twixt earth and skies,</span>
						<span>Up in the inner world of men arise.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">5.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Make me a fellow worker with thee, Christ;</span>
						<span>Nought else befits a God-born energy;</span>
						<span>Of all that's lovely, only lives the highest,</span>
						<span>Lifing the rest that it shall never die.</span>
						<span>Up I would be to help thee—for thou liest</span>
						<span>Not, linen-swathed in Joseph's garden-tomb,</span>
						<span>But walkest crowned, creation's heart and bloom.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">6.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>My God, when I would lift my heart to thee,</span>
						<span>Imagination instantly doth set</span>
						<span>A cloudy something, thin, and vast, and vague,</span>
						<span>To stand for him who is the fact of me;</span>
						<span>Then up the Will, and doth her weakness plague</span>
						<span>To pay the heart her duty and her debt,</span>
						<span>Showing the face that hearkeneth to the plea.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">7.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>And hence it comes that thou at times dost seem</span>
						<span>To fade into an image of my mind;</span>
						<span>I, dreamer, cover, hide thee up with dream,—</span>
						<span>Thee, primal, individual entity!—</span>
						<span>No likeness will I seek to frame or find,</span>
						<span>But cry to that which thou dost choose to be,</span>
						<span>To that which is my sight, therefore I cannot see.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">8.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>No likeness? Lo, the Christ! Oh, large Enough!</span>
						<span>I see, yet fathom not the face he wore.</span>
						<span>He is—and out of him there is no stuff</span>
						<span>To make a man. Let fail me every spark</span>
						<span>Of blissful vision on my pathway rough,</span>
						<span>I have seen much, and trust the perfect more,</span>
						<span>While to his feet my faith crosses the wayless dark.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">9.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Faith is the human shadow of thy might.</span>
						<span>Thou art the one self-perfect life, and we</span>
						<span>Who trust thy life, therein join on to thee,</span>
						<span>Taking our part in self-creating light.</span>
						<span>To trust is to step forward out of the night—</span>
						<span>To be—to share in the outgoing Will</span>
						<span>That lives and is, because outgoing still.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">10.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I am lost before thee, Father! yet I will</span>
						<span>Claim of thee my birthright ineffable.</span>
						<span>Thou lay'st it on me, son, to claim thee, sire;</span>
						<span>To that which thou hast made me, I aspire;</span>
						<span>To thee, the sun, upflames thy kindled fire.</span>
						<span>No man presumes in that to which he was born;</span>
						<span>Less than the gift to claim, would be the giver to scorn.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">11.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Henceforth all things thy dealings are with me</span>
						<span>For out of thee is nothing, or can be,</span>
						<span>And all things are to draw us home to thee.</span>
						<span>What matter that the knowers scoffing say,</span>
						<span>"This is old folly, plain to the new day"?—</span>
						<span>If thou be such as thou, and they as they,</span>
						<span>Unto thy Let there be, they still must answer Nay.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">12.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>They will not, therefore cannot, do not know him.</span>
						<span>Nothing they could know, could be God. In sooth,</span>
						<span>Unto the true alone exists the truth.</span>
						<span>They say well, saying Nature doth not show him:</span>
						<span>Truly she shows not what she cannot show;</span>
						<span>And they deny the thing they cannot know.</span>
						<span>Who sees a glory, towards it will go.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">13.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Faster no step moves God because the fool</span>
						<span>Shouts to the universe God there is none;</span>
						<span>The blindest man will not preach out the sun,</span>
						<span>Though on his darkness he should found a school.</span>
						<span>It may be, when he finds he is not dead,</span>
						<span>Though world and body, sight and sound are fled,</span>
						<span>Some eyes may open in his foolish head.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">14.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>When I am very weary with hard thought,</span>
						<span>And yet the question burns and is not quenched,</span>
						<span>My heart grows cool when to remembrance wrought</span>
						<span>That thou who know'st the light-born answer sought</span>
						<span>Know'st too the dark where the doubt lies entrenched—</span>
						<span>Know'st with what seemings I am sore perplexed,</span>
						<span>And that with thee I wait, nor needs my soul be vexed.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">15.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Who sets himself not sternly to be good,</span>
						<span>Is but a fool, who judgment of true things</span>
						<span>Has none, however oft the claim renewed.</span>
						<span>And he who thinks, in his great plenitude,</span>
						<span>To right himself, and set his spirit free,</span>
						<span>Without the might of higher communings,</span>
						<span>Is foolish also—save he willed himself to be.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">16.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>How many helps thou giv'st to those would learn!</span>
						<span>To some sore pain, to others a sinking heart;</span>
						<span>To some a weariness worse than any smart;</span>
						<span>To some a haunting, fearing, blind concern;</span>
						<span>Madness to some; to some the shaking dart</span>
						<span>Of hideous death still following as they turn;</span>
						<span>To some a hunger that will not depart.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">17.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>To some thou giv'st a deep unrest—a scorn</span>
						<span>Of all they are or see upon the earth;</span>
						<span>A gaze, at dusky night and clearing morn,</span>
						<span>As on a land of emptiness and dearth;</span>
						<span>To some a bitter sorrow; to some the sting</span>
						<span>Of love misprized—of sick abandoning;</span>
						<span>To some a frozen heart, oh, worse than anything!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">18.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>To some a mocking demon, that doth set</span>
						<span>The poor foiled will to scoff at the ideal,</span>
						<span>But loathsome makes to them their life of jar.</span>
						<span>The messengers of Satan think to mar,</span>
						<span>But make—driving the soul from false to feal—</span>
						<span>To thee, the reconciler, the one real,</span>
						<span>In whom alone the would be and the is are met.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">19.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Me thou hast given an infinite unrest,</span>
						<span>A hunger—not at first after known good,</span>
						<span>But something vague I knew not, and yet would—</span>
						<span>The veiled Isis, thy will not understood;</span>
						<span>A conscience tossing ever in my breast;</span>
						<span>And something deeper, that will not be expressed,</span>
						<span>Save as the Spirit thinking in the Spirit's brood.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">20.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>But now the Spirit and I are one in this—</span>
						<span>My hunger now is after righteousness;</span>
						<span>My spirit hopes in God to set me free</span>
						<span>From the low self loathed of the higher me.</span>
						<span>Great elder brother of my second birth,</span>
						<span>Dear o'er all names but one, in heaven or earth,</span>
						<span>Teach me all day to love eternally.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">21.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Lo, Lord, thou know'st, I would not anything</span>
						<span>That in the heart of God holds not its root;</span>
						<span>Nor falsely deem there is any life at all</span>
						<span>That doth in him nor sleep nor shine nor sing;</span>
						<span>I know the plants that bear the noisome fruit</span>
						<span>Of burning and of ashes and of gall—</span>
						<span>From God's heart torn, rootless to man's they cling.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">22.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Life-giving love rots to devouring fire;</span>
						<span>Justice corrupts to despicable revenge;</span>
						<span>Motherhood chokes in the dam's jealous mire;</span>
						<span>Hunger for growth turns fluctuating change;</span>
						<span>Love's anger grand grows spiteful human wrath,</span>
						<span>Hunting men out of conscience' holy path;</span>
						<span>And human kindness takes the tattler's range.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">23.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Nothing can draw the heart of man but good;</span>
						<span>Low good it is that draws him from the higher—</span>
						<span>So evil—poison uncreate from food.</span>
						<span>Never a foul thing, with temptation dire,</span>
						<span>Tempts hellward force created to aspire,</span>
						<span>But walks in wronged strength of imprisoned Truth,</span>
						<span>Whose mantle also oft the Shame indu'th.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">24.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Love in the prime not yet I understand—</span>
						<span>Scarce know the love that loveth at first hand:</span>
						<span>Help me my selfishness to scatter and scout;</span>
						<span>Blow on me till my love loves burningly;</span>
						<span>Then the great love will burn the mean self out,</span>
						<span>And I, in glorious simplicity,</span>
						<span>Living by love, shall love unspeakably.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">25.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Oh, make my anger pure—let no worst wrong</span>
						<span>Rouse in me the old niggard selfishness.</span>
						<span>Give me thine indignation—which is love</span>
						<span>Turned on the evil that would part love's throng;</span>
						<span>Thy anger scathes because it needs must bless,</span>
						<span>Gathering into union calm and strong</span>
						<span>All things on earth, and under, and above.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">26.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Make my forgiveness downright—such as I</span>
						<span>Should perish if I did not have from thee;</span>
						<span>I let the wrong go, withered up and dry,</span>
						<span>Cursed with divine forgetfulness in me.</span>
						<span>'Tis but self-pity, pleasant, mean, and sly,</span>
						<span>Low whispering bids the paltry memory live:—</span>
						<span>What am I brother for, but to forgive!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">27.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>"Thou art my father's child—come to my heart:"</span>
						<span>Thus must I say, or Thou must say, "Depart;"</span>
						<span>Thus I would say—I would be as thou art;</span>
						<span>Thus I must say, or still I work athwart</span>
						<span>The absolute necessity and law</span>
						<span>That dwells in me, and will me asunder draw,</span>
						<span>If in obedience I leave any flaw.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">28.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Lord, I forgive—and step in unto thee.</span>
						<span>If I have enemies, Christ deal with them:</span>
						<span>He hath forgiven me and Jerusalem.</span>
						<span>Lord, set me from self-inspiration free,</span>
						<span>And let me live and think from thee, not me—</span>
						<span>Rather, from deepest me then think and feel,</span>
						<span>At centre of thought's swift-revolving wheel.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">29.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I sit o'ercanopied with Beauty's tent,</span>
						<span>Through which flies many a golden-winged dove,</span>
						<span>Well watched of Fancy's tender eyes up bent;</span>
						<span>A hundred Powers wait on me, ministering;</span>
						<span>A thousand treasures Art and Knowledge bring;</span>
						<span>Will, Conscience, Reason tower the rest above;</span>
						<span>But in the midst, alone, I gladness am and love.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">30.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>'Tis but a vision, Lord; I do not mean</span>
						<span>That thus I am, or have one moment been—</span>
						<span>'Tis but a picture hung upon my wall,</span>
						<span>To measure dull contentment therewithal,</span>
						<span>And know behind the human how I fall;—</span>
						<span>A vision true, of what one day shall be,</span>
						<span>When thou hast had thy very will with me.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</section>
			<section id="the-diary-of-an-old-soul-july">
				<header>
					<h3>July</h3>
				</header>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">1.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>ALAS, my tent! see through it a whirlwind sweep!</span>
						<span>Moaning, poor Fancy's doves are swept away.</span>
						<span>I sit alone, a sorrow half asleep,</span>
						<span>My consciousness the blackness all astir.</span>
						<span>No pilgrim I, a homeless wanderer—</span>
						<span>For how canst Thou be in the darkness deep,</span>
						<span>Who dwellest only in the living day?</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">2.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>It must be, somewhere in my fluttering tent,</span>
						<span>Strange creatures, half tamed only yet, are pent—</span>
						<span>Dragons, lop-winged birds, and large-eyed snakes!</span>
						<span>Hark! through the storm the saddest howling breaks!</span>
						<span>Or are they loose, roaming about the bent,</span>
						<span>The darkness dire deepening with moan and scream?—</span>
						<span>My Morning, rise, and all shall be a dream.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">3.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Not thine, my Lord, the darkness all is mine—</span>
						<span>Save that, as mine, my darkness too is thine:</span>
						<span>All things are thine to save or to destroy—</span>
						<span>Destroy my darkness, rise my perfect joy;</span>
						<span>Love primal, the live coal of every night,</span>
						<span>Flame out, scare the ill things with radiant fright,</span>
						<span>And fill my tent with laughing morn's delight.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">4.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Master, thou workest with such common things—</span>
						<span>Low souls, weak hearts, I mean—and hast to use,</span>
						<span>Therefore, such common means and rescuings,</span>
						<span>That hard we find it, as we sit and muse,</span>
						<span>To think thou workest in us verily:</span>
						<span>Bad sea-boats we, and manned with wretched crews—</span>
						<span>That doubt the captain, watch the storm-spray flee.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">5.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Thou art hampered in thy natural working then</span>
						<span>When beings designed on freedom's holy plan</span>
						<span>Will not be free: with thy poor, foolish men,</span>
						<span>Thou therefore hast to work just like a man.</span>
						<span>But when, tangling thyself in their sore need,</span>
						<span>Thou hast to freedom fashioned them indeed,</span>
						<span>Then wilt thou grandly move, and Godlike speed.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">6.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Will this not then show grandest fact of all—</span>
						<span>In thy creation victory most renowned—</span>
						<span>That thou hast wrought thy will by slow and small,</span>
						<span>And made men like thee, though thy making bound</span>
						<span>By that which they were not, and could not be</span>
						<span>Until thou mad'st them make along with thee?—</span>
						<span>Master, the tardiness is but in me.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">7.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Hence come thy checks—because I still would run</span>
						<span>My head into the sand, nor flutter aloft</span>
						<span>Towards thy home, with thy wind under me.</span>
						<span>'Tis because I am mean, thy ways so oft</span>
						<span>Look mean to me; my rise is low begun;</span>
						<span>But scarce thy will doth grasp me, ere I see,</span>
						<span>For my arrest and rise, its stern necessity.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">8.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Like clogs upon the pinions of thy plan</span>
						<span>We hang—like captives on thy chariot-wheels,</span>
						<span>Who should climb up and ride with Death's conqueror;</span>
						<span>Therefore thy train along the world's highway steals</span>
						<span>So slow to the peace of heart-reluctant man.</span>
						<span>What shall we do to spread the wing and soar,</span>
						<span>Nor straiten thy deliverance any more?</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">9.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>The sole way to put flight into the wing,</span>
						<span>To preen its feathers, and to make them grow,</span>
						<span>Is to heed humbly every smallest thing</span>
						<span>With which the Christ in us has aught to do.</span>
						<span>So will the Christ from child to manhood go,</span>
						<span>Obedient to the father Christ, and so</span>
						<span>Sweet holy change will turn all our old things to new.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">10.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Creation thou dost work by faint degrees,</span>
						<span>By shade and shadow from unseen beginning;</span>
						<span>Far, far apart, in unthought mysteries</span>
						<span>Of thy own dark, unfathomable seas,</span>
						<span>Thou will'st thy will; and thence, upon the earth—</span>
						<span>Slow travelling, his way through centuries winning—</span>
						<span>A child at length arrives at never ending birth.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">11.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Well mayst thou then work on indocile hearts</span>
						<span>By small successes, disappointments small;</span>
						<span>By nature, weather, failure, or sore fall;</span>
						<span>By shame, anxiety, bitterness, and smarts;</span>
						<span>By loneliness, by weary loss of zest:—</span>
						<span>The rags, the husks, the swine, the hunger-quest,</span>
						<span>Drive home the wanderer to the father's breast.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">12.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>How suddenly some rapid turn of thought</span>
						<span>May throw the life-machine all out of gear,</span>
						<span>Clouding the windows with the steam of doubt,</span>
						<span>Filling the eyes with dust, with noise the ear!</span>
						<span>Who knows not then where dwells the engineer,</span>
						<span>Rushes aghast into the pathless night,</span>
						<span>And wanders in a land of dreary fright.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">13.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Amazed at sightless whirring of their wheels,</span>
						<span>Confounded with the recklessness and strife,</span>
						<span>Distract with fears of what may next ensue,</span>
						<span>Some break rude exit from the house of life,</span>
						<span>And plunge into a silence out of view—</span>
						<span>Whence not a cry, no wafture once reveals</span>
						<span>What door they have broke open with the knife.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">14.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Help me, my Father, in whatever dismay,</span>
						<span>Whatever terror in whatever shape,</span>
						<span>To hold the faster by thy garment's hem;</span>
						<span>When my heart sinks, oh, lift it up, I pray;</span>
						<span>Thy child should never fear though hell should gape,</span>
						<span>Not blench though all the ills that men affray</span>
						<span>Stood round him like the Roman round Jerusalem.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">15.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Too eager I must not be to understand.</span>
						<span>How should the work the master goes about</span>
						<span>Fit the vague sketch my compasses have planned?</span>
						<span>I am his house—for him to go in and out.</span>
						<span>He builds me now—and if I cannot see</span>
						<span>At any time what he is doing with me,</span>
						<span>'Tis that he makes the house for me too grand.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">16.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>The house is not for me—it is for him.</span>
						<span>His royal thoughts require many a stair,</span>
						<span>Many a tower, many an outlook fair,</span>
						<span>Of which I have no thought, and need no care.</span>
						<span>Where I am most perplexed, it may be there</span>
						<span>Thou mak'st a secret chamber, holy-dim,</span>
						<span>Where thou wilt come to help my deepest prayer.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">17.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I cannot tell why this day I am ill;</span>
						<span>But I am well because it is thy will—</span>
						<span>Which is to make me pure and right like thee.</span>
						<span>Not yet I need escape—'tis bearable</span>
						<span>Because thou knowest. And when harder things</span>
						<span>Shall rise and gather, and overshadow me,</span>
						<span>I shall have comfort in thy strengthenings.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">18.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>How do I live when thou art far away?—</span>
						<span>When I am sunk, and lost, and dead in sleep,</span>
						<span>Or in some dream with no sense in its play?</span>
						<span>When weary-dull, or drowned in study deep?—</span>
						<span>O Lord, I live so utterly on thee,</span>
						<span>I live when I forget thee utterly—</span>
						<span>Not that thou thinkest of, but thinkest me.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">19.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Thou far!—that word the holy truth doth blur.</span>
						<span>Doth the great ocean from the small fish run</span>
						<span>When it sleeps fast in its low weedy bower?</span>
						<span>Is the sun far from any smallest flower,</span>
						<span>That lives by his dear presence every hour?</span>
						<span>Are they not one in oneness without stir—</span>
						<span>The flower the flower because the sun the sun?</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">20.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>"Dear presence every hour"!—what of the night,</span>
						<span>When crumpled daisies shut gold sadness in;</span>
						<span>And some do hang the head for lack of light,</span>
						<span>Sick almost unto death with absence-blight?—</span>
						<span>Thy memory then, warm-lingering in the ground,</span>
						<span>Mourned dewy in the air, keeps their hearts sound,</span>
						<span>Till fresh with day their lapsed life begin.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">21.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>All things are shadows of the shining true:</span>
						<span>Sun, sea, and air—close, potent, hurtless fire—</span>
						<span>Flowers from their mother's prison—dove, and dew—</span>
						<span>Every thing holds a slender guiding clue</span>
						<span>Back to the mighty oneness:—hearts of faith</span>
						<span>Know thee than light, than heat, endlessly nigher,</span>
						<span>Our life's life, carpenter of Nazareth.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">22.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Sometimes, perhaps, the spiritual blood runs slow,</span>
						<span>And soft along the veins of will doth flow,</span>
						<span>Seeking God's arteries from which it came.</span>
						<span>Or does the etherial, creative flame</span>
						<span>Turn back upon itself, and latent grow?—</span>
						<span>It matters not what figure or what name,</span>
						<span>If thou art in me, and I am not to blame.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">23.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>In such God-silence, the soul's nest, so long</span>
						<span>As all is still, no flutter and no song,</span>
						<span>Is safe. But if my soul begin to act</span>
						<span>Without some waking to the eternal fact</span>
						<span>That my dear life is hid with Christ in God—</span>
						<span>I think and move a creature of earth's clod,</span>
						<span>Stand on the finite, act upon the wrong.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">24.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>My soul this sermon hence for itself prepares:—</span>
						<span>"Then is there nothing vile thou mayst not do,</span>
						<span>Buffeted in a tumult of low cares,</span>
						<span>And treacheries of the old man 'gainst the new."—</span>
						<span>Lord, in my spirit let thy spirit move,</span>
						<span>Warning, that it may not have to reprove:—</span>
						<span>In my dead moments, master, stir the prayers.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">25.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Lord, let my soul o'erburdened then feel thee</span>
						<span>Thrilling through all its brain's stupidity.</span>
						<span>If I must slumber, heedless of ill harms,</span>
						<span>Let it not be but in my Father's arms;</span>
						<span>Outside the shelter of his garment's fold,</span>
						<span>All is a waste, a terror-haunted wold.—</span>
						<span>Lord, keep me. 'Tis thy child that cries. Behold.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">26.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Some say that thou their endless love host won</span>
						<span>By deeds for them which I may not believe</span>
						<span>Thou ever didst, or ever willedst done:</span>
						<span>What matter, so they love thee? They receive</span>
						<span>Eternal more than the poor loom and wheel</span>
						<span>Of their invention ever wove and spun.—</span>
						<span>I love thee for I must, thine all from head to heel.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">27.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>The love of thee will set all notions right.</span>
						<span>Right save by love no thought can be or may;</span>
						<span>Only love's knowledge is the primal light.</span>
						<span>Questions keep camp along love's shining coast—</span>
						<span>Challenge my love and would my entrance stay:</span>
						<span>Across the buzzing, doubting, challenging host,</span>
						<span>I rush to thee, and cling, and cry—Thou know'st.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">28.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Oh, let me live in thy realities,</span>
						<span>Nor substitute my notions for thy facts,</span>
						<span>Notion with notion making leagues and pacts;</span>
						<span>They are to truth but as dream-deeds to acts,</span>
						<span>And questioned, make me doubt of everything.—</span>
						<span>"O Lord, my God," my heart gets up and cries,</span>
						<span>"Come thy own self, and with thee my faith bring."</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">29.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>O master, my desires to work, to know,</span>
						<span>To be aware that I do live and grow—</span>
						<span>All restless wish for anything not thee,</span>
						<span>I yield, and on thy altar offer me.</span>
						<span>Let me no more from out thy presence go,</span>
						<span>But keep me waiting watchful for thy will—</span>
						<span>Even while I do it, waiting watchful still.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">30.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Thou art the Lord of life, the secret thing.</span>
						<span>Thou wilt give endless more than I could find,</span>
						<span>Even if without thee I could go and seek;</span>
						<span>For thou art one, Christ, with my deepest mind,</span>
						<span>Duty alive, self-willed, in me dost speak,</span>
						<span>And to a deeper purer being sting:</span>
						<span>I come to thee, my life, my causing kind.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">31.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Nothing is alien in thy world immense—</span>
						<span>No look of sky or earth or man or beast;</span>
						<span>"In the great hand of God I stand, and thence"</span>
						<span>Look out on life, his endless, holy feast.</span>
						<span>To try to feel is but to court despair,</span>
						<span>To dig for a sun within a garden-fence:</span>
						<span>Who does thy will, O God, he lives upon thy air.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</section>
			<section id="the-diary-of-an-old-soul-august">
				<header>
					<h3>August</h3>
				</header>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">1.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>SO shall abundant entrance me be given</span>
						<span>Into the truth, my life's inheritance.</span>
						<span>Lo! as the sun shoots straight from out his tomb,</span>
						<span>God-floated, casting round a lordly glance</span>
						<span>Into the corners of his endless room,</span>
						<span>So, through the rent which thou, O Christ, hast riven,</span>
						<span>I enter liberty's divine expanse.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">2.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>It will be so—ah, so it is not now!</span>
						<span>Who seeks thee for a little lazy peace,</span>
						<span>Then, like a man all weary of the plough,</span>
						<span>That leaves it standing in the furrow's crease,</span>
						<span>Turns from thy presence for a foolish while,</span>
						<span>Till comes again the rasp of unrest's file,</span>
						<span>From liberty is distant many a mile.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">3.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Like one that stops, and drinks, and turns, and goes</span>
						<span>Into a land where never water flows,</span>
						<span>There travels on, the dry and thirsty day,</span>
						<span>Until the hot night veils the farther way,</span>
						<span>Then turns and finds again the bubbling pool—</span>
						<span>Here would I build my house, take up my stay,</span>
						<span>Nor ever leave my Sychar's margin cool.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">4.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Keep me, Lord, with thee. I call from out the dark—</span>
						<span>Hear in thy light, of which I am a spark.</span>
						<span>I know not what is mine and what is thine—</span>
						<span>Of branch and stem I miss the differing mark—</span>
						<span>But if a mere hair's-breadth me separateth,</span>
						<span>That hair's-breadth is eternal, infinite death.</span>
						<span>For sap thy dead branch calls, O living vine!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">5.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I have no choice, I must do what I can;</span>
						<span>But thou dost me, and all things else as well;</span>
						<span>Thou wilt take care thy child shall grow a man.</span>
						<span>Rouse thee, my faith; be king; with life be one;</span>
						<span>To trust in God is action's highest kind;</span>
						<span>Who trusts in God, his heart with life doth swell;</span>
						<span>Faith opens all the windows to God's wind.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">6.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>O Father, thou art my eternity.</span>
						<span>Not on the clasp Of consciousness—on thee</span>
						<span>My life depends; and I can well afford</span>
						<span>All to forget, so thou remember, Lord.</span>
						<span>In thee I rest; in sleep thou dost me fold;</span>
						<span>In thee I labour; still in thee, grow old;</span>
						<span>And dying, shall I not in thee, my Life, be bold?</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">7.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>In holy things may be unholy greed.</span>
						<span>Thou giv'st a glimpse of many a lovely thing,</span>
						<span>Not to be stored for use in any mind,</span>
						<span>But only for the present spiritual need.</span>
						<span>The holiest bread, if hoarded, soon will breed</span>
						<span>The mammon-moth, the having-pride, I find.</span>
						<span>'Tis momently thy heart gives out heart-quickening.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">8.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>It is thyself, and neither this nor that,</span>
						<span>Nor anything, told, taught, or dreamed of thee,</span>
						<span>That keeps us live. The holy maid who sat</span>
						<span>Low at thy feet, choosing the better part,</span>
						<span>Rising, bore with her—what a memory!</span>
						<span>Yet, brooding only on that treasure, she</span>
						<span>Had soon been roused by conscious loss of heart.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">9.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I am a fool when I would stop and think,</span>
						<span>And lest I lose my thoughts, from duty shrink.</span>
						<span>It is but avarice in another shape.</span>
						<span>'Tis as the vine-branch were to hoard the grape,</span>
						<span>Nor trust the living root beneath the sod.</span>
						<span>What trouble is that child to thee, my God,</span>
						<span>Who sips thy gracious cup, and will not drink!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">10.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>True, faithful action only is the life,</span>
						<span>The grapes for which we feel the pruning knife.</span>
						<span>Thoughts are but leaves; they fall and feed the ground.</span>
						<span>The holy seasons, swift and slow, go round;</span>
						<span>The ministering leaves return, fresh, large, and rife—</span>
						<span>But fresher, larger, more thoughts to the brain:—</span>
						<span>Farewell, my dove!—come back, hope-laden, through the rain.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">11.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Well may this body poorer, feebler grow!</span>
						<span>It is undressing for its last sweet bed;</span>
						<span>But why should the soul, which death shall never know,</span>
						<span>Authority, and power, and memory shed?</span>
						<span>It is that love with absolute faith would wed;</span>
						<span>God takes the inmost garments off his child,</span>
						<span>To have him in his arms, naked and undefiled.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">12.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Thou art my knowledge and my memory,</span>
						<span>No less than my real, deeper life, my love.</span>
						<span>I will not fool, degrade myself to trust</span>
						<span>In less than that which maketh me say Me,</span>
						<span>In less than that causing itself to be.</span>
						<span>Then art within me, behind, beneath, above—</span>
						<span>I will be thine because I may and must.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">13.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Thou art the truth, the life. Thou, Lord, wilt see</span>
						<span>To every question that perplexes me.</span>
						<span>I am thy being; and my dignity</span>
						<span>Is written with my name down in thy book;</span>
						<span>Thou wilt care for it. Never shall I think</span>
						<span>Of anything that thou mightst overlook:—</span>
						<span>In faith-born triumph at thy feet I sink.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">14.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Thou carest more for that which I call mine,</span>
						<span>In same sort—better manner than I could,</span>
						<span>Even if I knew creation's ends divine,</span>
						<span>Rousing in me this vague desire of good.</span>
						<span>Thou art more to me than my desires' whole brood;</span>
						<span>Thou art the only person, and I cry</span>
						<span>Unto the father I of this my I.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">15.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Thou who inspirest prayer, then bend'st thine ear;</span>
						<span>It, crying with love's grand respect to hear!</span>
						<span>I cannot give myself to thee aright—</span>
						<span>With the triumphant uttermost of gift;</span>
						<span>That cannot be till I am full of light—</span>
						<span>To perfect deed a perfect will must lift:—</span>
						<span>Inspire, possess, compel me, first of every might.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">16.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I do not wonder men can ill believe</span>
						<span>Who make poor claims upon thee, perfect Lord;</span>
						<span>Then most I trust when most I would receive.</span>
						<span>I wonder not that such do pray and grieve—</span>
						<span>The God they think, to be God is not fit.</span>
						<span>Then only in thy glory I seem to sit,</span>
						<span>When my heart claims from thine an infinite accord.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">17.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>More life I need ere I myself can be.</span>
						<span>Sometimes, when the eternal tide ebbs low,</span>
						<span>A moment weary of my life I grow—</span>
						<span>Weary of my existence' self, I mean,</span>
						<span>Not of its plodding, not its wind and snow</span>
						<span>Then to thy knee trusting I turn, and lean:</span>
						<span>Thou will'st I live, and I do will with thee.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">18.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Dost thou mean sometimes that we should forget thee,</span>
						<span>Dropping the veil of things 'twixt thee and us?—</span>
						<span>Ah, not that we should lose thee and regret thee!</span>
						<span>But that, we turning from our windows thus,</span>
						<span>The frost-fixed God should vanish from the pane,</span>
						<span>Sun-melted, and a moment, Father, let thee</span>
						<span>Look like thyself straight into heart and brain.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">19.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>For sometimes when I am busy among men,</span>
						<span>With heart and brain an open thoroughfare</span>
						<span>For faces, words, and thoughts other than mine,</span>
						<span>And a pause comes at length—oh, sudden then,</span>
						<span>Back throbs the tide with rush exultant rare;</span>
						<span>And for a gentle moment I divine</span>
						<span>Thy dawning presence flush my tremulous air.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">20.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>If I have to forget thee, do thou see</span>
						<span>It be a good, not bad forgetfulness;</span>
						<span>That all its mellow, truthful air be free</span>
						<span>From dusty noes, and soft with many a yes;</span>
						<span>That as thy breath my life, my life may be</span>
						<span>Man's breath. So when thou com'st at hour unknown,</span>
						<span>Thou shalt find nothing in me but thine own.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">21.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Thou being in me, in my deepest me,</span>
						<span>Through all the time I do not think of thee,</span>
						<span>Shall I not grow at last so true within</span>
						<span>As to forget thee and yet never sin?</span>
						<span>Shall I not walk the loud world's busy way,</span>
						<span>Yet in thy palace-porch sit all the day?</span>
						<span>Not conscious think of thee, yet never from thee stray?</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">22.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Forget!—Oh, must it be?—Would it were rather</span>
						<span>That every sense was so filled with my father</span>
						<span>That not in anything could I forget him,</span>
						<span>But deepest, highest must in all things set him!—</span>
						<span>Yet if thou think in me, God, what great matter</span>
						<span>Though my poor thought to former break and latter—</span>
						<span>As now my best thoughts; break, before thee foiled, and scatter!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">23.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Some way there must be of my not forgetting,</span>
						<span>And thither thou art leading me, my God.</span>
						<span>The child that, weary of his mother's petting,</span>
						<span>Runs out the moment that his feet are shod,</span>
						<span>May see her face in every flower he sees,</span>
						<span>And she, although beyond the window sitting,</span>
						<span>Be nearer him than when he sat upon her knees.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">24.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>What if, when I at last, at the long last,</span>
						<span>Shall see thy face, my Lord, my life's delight,</span>
						<span>It should not be the face that hath been glassed</span>
						<span>In poor imagination's mirror slight!</span>
						<span>Will my soul sink, and shall I stand aghast,</span>
						<span>Beggared of hope, my heart a conscious blight,</span>
						<span>Amazed and lost—death's bitterness come and not passed?</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">25.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Ah, no! for from thy heart the love will press,</span>
						<span>And shining from thy perfect human face,</span>
						<span>Will sink into me like the father's kiss;</span>
						<span>And deepening wide the gulf of consciousness</span>
						<span>Beyond imagination's lowest abyss,</span>
						<span>Will, with the potency of creative grace,</span>
						<span>Lord it throughout the larger thinking place.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">26.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Thus God-possessed, new born, ah, not for long</span>
						<span>Should I the sight behold, beatified,</span>
						<span>Know it creating in me, feel the throng</span>
						<span>Of speechless hopes out-throbbing like a tide,</span>
						<span>And my heart rushing, borne aloft the flood,</span>
						<span>To offer at his feet its living blood—</span>
						<span>Ere, glory-hid, the other face I spied.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">27.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>For out imagination is, in small,</span>
						<span>And with the making-difference that must be,</span>
						<span>Mirror of God's creating mirror; all</span>
						<span>That shows itself therein, that formeth he,</span>
						<span>And there is Christ, no bodiless vanity,</span>
						<span>Though, face to face, the mighty perfectness</span>
						<span>With glory blurs the dim-reflected less.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">28.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I clasp thy feet, O father of the living!</span>
						<span>Thou wilt not let my fluttering hopes be more,</span>
						<span>Or lovelier, or greater, than thy giving!</span>
						<span>Surely thy ships will bring to my poor shore,</span>
						<span>Of gold and peacocks such a shining store</span>
						<span>As will laugh all the dreams to holy scorn,</span>
						<span>Of love and sorrow that were ever born.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">29.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Sometimes it seems pure natural to trust,</span>
						<span>And trust right largely, grandly, infinitely,</span>
						<span>Daring the splendour of the giver's part;</span>
						<span>At other times, the whole earth is but dust,</span>
						<span>The sky is dust, yea, dust the human heart;</span>
						<span>Then art thou nowhere, there is no room for thee</span>
						<span>In the great dust-heap of eternity.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">30.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>But why should it be possible to mistrust—</span>
						<span>Nor possible only, but its opposite hard?</span>
						<span>Why should not man believe because he must—</span>
						<span>By sight's compulsion? Why should he be scarred</span>
						<span>With conflict? worn with doubting fine and long?—</span>
						<span>No man is fit for heaven's musician throng</span>
						<span>Who has not tuned an instrument all shook and jarred.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">31.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Therefore, O Lord, when all things common seem,</span>
						<span>When all is dust, and self the centre clod,</span>
						<span>When grandeur is a hopeless, foolish dream,</span>
						<span>And anxious care more reasonable than God,—</span>
						<span>Out of the ashes I will call to thee—</span>
						<span>In spite of dead distrust call earnestly:—</span>
						<span>Oh thou who livest, call, then answer dying me.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</section>
			<section id="the-diary-of-an-old-soul-september">
				<header>
					<h3>September</h3>
				</header>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">1.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>WE are a shadow and a shining, we!</span>
						<span>One moment nothing seems but what we see,</span>
						<span>Nor aught to rule but common circumstance—</span>
						<span>Nought is to seek but praise, to shun but chance;</span>
						<span>A moment more, and God is all in all,</span>
						<span>And not a sparrow from its nest can fall</span>
						<span>But from the ground its chirp goes up into his hall.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">2.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I know at least which is the better mood.</span>
						<span>When on a heap of cares I sit and brood,</span>
						<span>Like Job upon his ashes, sorely vext,</span>
						<span>I feel a lower thing than when I stood</span>
						<span>The world's true heir, fearless as, on its stalk,</span>
						<span>A lily meeting Jesus in his walk:</span>
						<span>I am not all mood—I can judge betwixt.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">3.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Such differing moods can scarce to one belong;</span>
						<span>Shall the same fountain sweet and bitter yield?</span>
						<span>Shall what bore late the dust-mood, think and brood</span>
						<span>Till it bring forth the great believing mood?</span>
						<span>Or that which bore the grand mood, bald and peeled,</span>
						<span>Sit down to croon the shabby sensual song,</span>
						<span>To hug itself, and sink from wrong to meaner wrong?</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">4.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>In the low mood, the mere man acts alone,</span>
						<span>Moved by impulses which, if from within,</span>
						<span>Yet far outside the centre man begin;</span>
						<span>But in the grand mood, every softest tone</span>
						<span>Comes from the living God at very heart—</span>
						<span>From thee who infinite core of being art,</span>
						<span>Thee who didst call our names ere ever we could sin.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">5.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>There is a coward sparing in the heart,</span>
						<span>Offspring of penury and low-born fear:—</span>
						<span>Prayer must take heed nor overdo its part,</span>
						<span>Asking too much of him with open ear!</span>
						<span>Sinners must wait, not seek the very best,</span>
						<span>Cry out for peace, and be of middling cheer:—</span>
						<span>False heart! thou cheatest God, and dost thy life molest.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">6.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Thou hungerest not, thou thirstest not enough.</span>
						<span>Thou art a temporizing thing, mean heart.</span>
						<span>Down-drawn, thou pick'st up straws and wretched stuff,</span>
						<span>Stooping as if the world's floor were the chart</span>
						<span>Of the long way thy lazy feet must tread.</span>
						<span>Thou dreamest of the crown hung o'er thy head—</span>
						<span>But that is safe—thou gatherest hairs and fluff!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">7.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Man's highest action is to reach up higher,</span>
						<span>Stir up himself to take hold of his sire.</span>
						<span>Then best I love you, dearest, when I go</span>
						<span>And cry to love's life I may love you so</span>
						<span>As to content the yearning, making love,</span>
						<span>That perfects strength divine in weakness' fire,</span>
						<span>And from the broken pots calls out the silver dove.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">8.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Poor am I, God knows, poor as withered leaf;</span>
						<span>Poorer or richer than, I dare not ask.</span>
						<span>To love aright, for me were hopeless task,</span>
						<span>Eternities too high to comprehend.</span>
						<span>But shall I tear my heart in hopeless grief,</span>
						<span>Or rise and climb, and run and kneel, and bend,</span>
						<span>And drink the primal love—so love in chief?</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">9.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Then love shall wake and be its own high life.</span>
						<span>Then shall I know 'tis I that love indeed—</span>
						<span>Ready, without a moment's questioning strife,</span>
						<span>To be forgot, like bursting water-bead,</span>
						<span>For the high good of the eternal dear;</span>
						<span>All hope, all claim, resting, with spirit clear,</span>
						<span>Upon the living love that every love doth breed.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">10.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Ever seem to fail in utterance.</span>
						<span>Sometimes amid the swift melodious dance</span>
						<span>Of fluttering words—as if it had not been,</span>
						<span>The thought has melted, vanished into night;</span>
						<span>Sometimes I say a thing I did not mean,</span>
						<span>And lo! 'tis better, by thy ordered chance,</span>
						<span>Than what eluded me, floating too feathery light.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">11.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>If thou wouldst have me speak, Lord, give me speech.</span>
						<span>So many cries are uttered now-a-days,</span>
						<span>That scarce a song, however clear and true,</span>
						<span>Will thread the jostling tumult safe, and reach</span>
						<span>The ears of men buz-filled with poor denays:</span>
						<span>Barb thou my words with light, make my song new,</span>
						<span>And men will hear, or when I sing or preach.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">12.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Can anything go wrong with me? I ask—</span>
						<span>And the same moment, at a sudden pain,</span>
						<span>Stand trembling. Up from the great river's brim</span>
						<span>Comes a cold breath; the farther bank is dim;</span>
						<span>The heaven is black with clouds and coming rain;</span>
						<span>High soaring faith is grown a heavy task,</span>
						<span>And all is wrong with weary heart and brain.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">13.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>"Things do go wrong. I know grief, pain, and fear.</span>
						<span>I see them lord it sore and wide around."</span>
						<span>From her fair twilight answers Truth, star-crowned,</span>
						<span>"Things wrong are needful where wrong things abound.</span>
						<span>Things go not wrong; but Pain, with dog and spear,</span>
						<span>False faith from human hearts will hunt and hound.</span>
						<span>The earth shall quake 'neath them that trust the solid ground."</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">14.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Things go not wrong when sudden I fall prone,</span>
						<span>But when I snatch my upheld hand from thine,</span>
						<span>And, proud or careless, think to walk alone.</span>
						<span>Then things go wrong, when I, poor, silly sheep,</span>
						<span>To shelves and pits from the good pasture creep;</span>
						<span>Not when the shepherd leaves the ninety and nine,</span>
						<span>And to the mountains goes, after the foolish one.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">15.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Lo! now thy swift dogs, over stone and bush,</span>
						<span>After me, straying sheep, loud barking, rush.</span>
						<span>There's Fear, and Shame, and Empty-heart, and Lack,</span>
						<span>And Lost-love, and a thousand at their back!</span>
						<span>I see thee not, but know thou hound'st them on,</span>
						<span>And I am lost indeed—escape is none.</span>
						<span>See! there they come, down streaming on my track!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">16.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I rise and run, staggering—double and run.—</span>
						<span>But whither?—whither?—whither for escape?</span>
						<span>The sea lies all about this long-necked cape—</span>
						<span>There come the dogs, straight for me every one—</span>
						<span>Me, live despair, live centre of alarms!—</span>
						<span>Ah! lo! 'twixt me and all his barking harms,</span>
						<span>The shepherd, lo!—I run—fall folded in his arms.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">17.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>There let the dogs yelp, let them growl and leap;</span>
						<span>It is no matter—I will go to sleep.</span>
						<span>Like a spent cloud pass pain and grief and fear,</span>
						<span>Out from behind it unchanged love shines clear.—</span>
						<span>Oh, save me, Christ!—I know not what I am,</span>
						<span>I was thy stupid, self-willed, greedy lamb,</span>
						<span>Would be thy honest and obedient sheep.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">18.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Why is it that so often I return</span>
						<span>From social converse with a spirit worn,</span>
						<span>A lack, a disappointment—even a sting</span>
						<span>Of shame, as for some low, unworthy thing?—</span>
						<span>Because I have not, careful, first of all,</span>
						<span>Set my door open wide, back to the wall,</span>
						<span>Ere I at others' doors did knock and call.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">19.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Yet more and more of me thou dost demand;</span>
						<span>My faith and hope in God alone shall stand,</span>
						<span>The life of law—not trust the rain and sun</span>
						<span>To draw the golden harvest o'er the land.</span>
						<span>I must not say—"This too will pass and die,"</span>
						<span>"The wind will change," "Round will the seasons run."</span>
						<span>Law is the body of will, of conscious harmony.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">20.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Who trusts a law, might worship a god of wood;</span>
						<span>Half his soul slumbers, if it be not dead.</span>
						<span>He is a live thing shut in chaos crude,</span>
						<span>Hemmed in with dragons—a remorseless head</span>
						<span>Still hanging over its uplifted eyes.</span>
						<span>No; God is all in all, and nowhere dies—</span>
						<span>The present heart and thinking will of good.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">21.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Law is our schoolmaster. Our master, Christ,</span>
						<span>Lived under all our laws, yet always prayed—</span>
						<span>So walked the water when the storm was highest.—</span>
						<span>Law is Thy father's; thou hast it obeyed,</span>
						<span>And it thereby subject to thee hast made—</span>
						<span>To rule it, master, for thy brethren's sakes:—</span>
						<span>Well may he guide the law by whom law's maker makes.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">22.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Death haunts our souls with dissolution's strife;</span>
						<span>Soaks them with unrest; makes our every breath</span>
						<span>A throe, not action; from God's purest gift</span>
						<span>Wipes off the bloom; and on the harp of faith</span>
						<span>Its fretted strings doth slacken still and shift:</span>
						<span>Life everywhere, perfect, and always life,</span>
						<span>Is sole redemption from this haunting death.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">23.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>God, thou from death dost lift me. As I rise,</span>
						<span>Its Lethe from my garment drips and flows.</span>
						<span>Ere long I shall be safe in upper air,</span>
						<span>With thee, my life—with thee, my answered prayer</span>
						<span>Where thou art God in every wind that blows,</span>
						<span>And self alone, and ever, softly dies,</span>
						<span>There shall my being blossom, and I know it fair.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">24.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I would dig, Master, in no field but thine,</span>
						<span>Would build my house only upon thy rock,</span>
						<span>Yet am but a dull day, with a sea-sheen!</span>
						<span>Why should I wonder then that they should mock,</span>
						<span>Who, in the limbo of things heard and seen,</span>
						<span>Hither and thither blowing, lose the shine</span>
						<span>Of every light that hangs in the firmament divine.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">25.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Lord, loosen in me the hold of visible things;</span>
						<span>Help me to walk by faith and not by sight;</span>
						<span>I would, through thickest veils and coverings,</span>
						<span>See into the chambers of the living light.</span>
						<span>Lord, in the land of things that swell and seem,</span>
						<span>Help me to walk by the other light supreme,</span>
						<span>Which shows thy facts behind man's vaguely hinting dream.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">26.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I see a little child whose eager hands</span>
						<span>Search the thick stream that drains the crowded street</span>
						<span>For possible things hid in its current slow.</span>
						<span>Near by, behind him, a great palace stands,</span>
						<span>Where kings might welcome nobles to their feet.</span>
						<span>Soft sounds, sweet scents, fair sights there only go—</span>
						<span>There the child's father lives, but the child does not know.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">27.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>On, eager, hungry, busy-seeking child,</span>
						<span>Rise up, turn round, run in, run up the stair.</span>
						<span>Far in a chamber from rude noise exiled,</span>
						<span>Thy father sits, pondering how thou dost fare.</span>
						<span>The mighty man will clasp thee to his breast:</span>
						<span>Will kiss thee, stroke the tangles of thy hair,</span>
						<span>And lap thee warm in fold on fold of lovely rest.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">28.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>The prince of this world came, and nothing found</span>
						<span>In thee, O master; but, ah, woe is me!</span>
						<span>He cannot pass me, on other business bound,</span>
						<span>But, spying in me things familiar, he</span>
						<span>Casts over me the shadow of his flight,</span>
						<span>And straight I moan in darkness—and the fight</span>
						<span>Begins afresh betwixt the world and thee.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">29.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>In my own heart, O master, in my thought,</span>
						<span>Betwixt the woolly sheep and hairy goat</span>
						<span>Not clearly I distinguish; but I think</span>
						<span>Thou knowest that I fight upon thy side.</span>
						<span>The how I am ashamed of; for I shrink</span>
						<span>From many a blow—am borne on the battle-tide,</span>
						<span>When I should rush to the front, and take thy foe by the throat.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">30.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>The enemy still hath many things in me;</span>
						<span>Yea, many an evil nest with open hole</span>
						<span>Gapes out to him, at which he enters free.</span>
						<span>But, like the impact of a burning coal,</span>
						<span>His presence mere straight rouses the garrison,</span>
						<span>And all are up in arms, and down on knee,</span>
						<span>Fighting and praying till the foe is gone.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</section>
			<section id="the-diary-of-an-old-soul-october">
				<header>
					<h3>October</h3>
				</header>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">1.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>REMEMBER, Lord, thou hast not made me good.</span>
						<span>Or if thou didst, it was so long ago</span>
						<span>I have forgotten—and never understood,</span>
						<span>I humbly think. At best it was a crude,</span>
						<span>A rough-hewn goodness, that did need this woe,</span>
						<span>This sin, these harms of all kinds fierce and rude,</span>
						<span>To shape it out, making it live and grow.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">2.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>But thou art making me, I thank thee, sire.</span>
						<span>What thou hast done and doest thou know'st well,</span>
						<span>And I will help thee:—gently in thy fire</span>
						<span>I will lie burning; on thy potter's-wheel</span>
						<span>I will whirl patient, though my brain should reel;</span>
						<span>Thy grace shall be enough the grief to quell,</span>
						<span>And growing strength perfect through weakness dire.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">3.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I have not knowledge, wisdom, insight, thought,</span>
						<span>Nor understanding, fit to justify</span>
						<span>Thee in thy work, O Perfect. Thou hast brought</span>
						<span>Me up to this—and, lo! what thou hast wrought,</span>
						<span>I cannot call it good. But I can cry—</span>
						<span>"O enemy, the maker hath not done;</span>
						<span>One day thou shalt behold, and from the sight wilt run."</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">4.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>The faith I will, aside is easily bent;</span>
						<span>But of thy love, my God, one glimpse alone</span>
						<span>Can make me absolutely confident—</span>
						<span>With faith, hope, joy, in love responsive blent.</span>
						<span>My soul then, in the vision mighty grown,</span>
						<span>Its father and its fate securely known,</span>
						<span>Falls on thy bosom with exultant moan.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">5.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Thou workest perfectly. And if it seem</span>
						<span>Some things are not so well, 'tis but because</span>
						<span>They are too loving-deep, too lofty-wise,</span>
						<span>For me, poor child, to understand their laws:</span>
						<span>My highest wisdom half is but a dream;</span>
						<span>My love runs helpless like a falling stream:</span>
						<span>Thy good embraces ill, and lo! its illness dies!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">6.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>From sleep I wake, and wake to think of thee.</span>
						<span>But wherefore not with sudden glorious glee?</span>
						<span>Why burst not gracious on me heaven and earth</span>
						<span>In all the splendour of a new-day-birth?</span>
						<span>Why hangs a cloud betwixt my lord and me?</span>
						<span>The moment that my eyes the morning greet,</span>
						<span>My soul should panting rush to clasp thy father-feet.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">7.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Is it because it is not thou I see,</span>
						<span>But only my poor, blotted fancy of thee?</span>
						<span>Oh! never till thyself reveal thy face,</span>
						<span>Shall I be flooded with life's vital grace.</span>
						<span>Oh make my mirror-heart thy shining-place,</span>
						<span>And then my soul, awaking with the morn,</span>
						<span>Shall be a waking joy, eternally new-born.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">8.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Lord, in my silver is much metal base,</span>
						<span>Else should my being by this time have shown</span>
						<span>Thee thy own self therein. Therefore do I</span>
						<span>Wake in the furnace. I know thou sittest by,</span>
						<span>Refining—look, keep looking in to try</span>
						<span>Thy silver; master, look and see thy face,</span>
						<span>Else here I lie for ever, blank as any stone.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">9.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>But when in the dim silver thou dost look,</span>
						<span>I do behold thy face, though blurred and faint.</span>
						<span>Oh joy! no flaw in me thy grace will brook,</span>
						<span>But still refine: slow shall the silver pass</span>
						<span>From bright to brighter, till, sans spot or taint,</span>
						<span>Love, well content, shall see no speck of brass,</span>
						<span>And I his perfect face shall hold as in a glass.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">10.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>With every morn my life afresh must break</span>
						<span>The crust of self, gathered about me fresh;</span>
						<span>That thy wind-spirit may rush in and shake</span>
						<span>The darkness out of me, and rend the mesh</span>
						<span>The spider-devils spin out of the flesh—</span>
						<span>Eager to net the soul before it wake,</span>
						<span>That it may slumberous lie, and listen to the snake.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">11.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>'Tis that I am not good—that is enough;</span>
						<span>I pry no farther—that is not the way.</span>
						<span>Here, O my potter, is thy making stuff!</span>
						<span>Set thy wheel going; let it whir and play.</span>
						<span>The chips in me, the stones, the straws, the sand,</span>
						<span>Cast them out with fine separating hand,</span>
						<span>And make a vessel of thy yielding clay.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">12.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>What if it take a thousand years to make me,</span>
						<span>So me he leave not, angry, on the floor!—</span>
						<span>Nay, thou art never angry!—that would break me!</span>
						<span>Would I tried never thy dear patience sore,</span>
						<span>But were as good as thou couldst well expect me,</span>
						<span>Whilst thou dost make, I mar, and thou correct me!</span>
						<span>Then were I now content, waiting for something more.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">13.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Only, my God, see thou that I content thee—</span>
						<span>Oh, take thy own content upon me, God!</span>
						<span>Ah, never, never, sure, wilt thou repent thee,</span>
						<span>That thou hast called thy Adam from the clod!</span>
						<span>Yet must I mourn that thou shouldst ever find me</span>
						<span>One moment sluggish, needing more of the rod</span>
						<span>Than thou didst think when thy desire designed me.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">14.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>My God, it troubles me I am not better.</span>
						<span>More help, I pray, still more. Thy perfect debtor</span>
						<span>I shall be when thy perfect child I am grown.</span>
						<span>My Father, help me—am I not thine own?</span>
						<span>Lo, other lords have had dominion o'er me,</span>
						<span>But now thy will alone I set before me:</span>
						<span>Thy own heart's life—Lord, thou wilt not abhor me!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">15.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>In youth, when once again I had set out</span>
						<span>To find thee, Lord, my life, my liberty,</span>
						<span>A window now and then, clouds all about,</span>
						<span>Would open into heaven: my heart forlorn</span>
						<span>First all would tremble with a solemn glee,</span>
						<span>Then, whelmed in peace, rest like a man outworn,</span>
						<span>That sees the dawn slow part the closed lids of the morn.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">16.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Now I grow old, and the soft-gathered years</span>
						<span>Have calmed, yea dulled the heart's swift fluttering beat;</span>
						<span>But a quiet hope that keeps its household seat</span>
						<span>Is better than recurrent glories fleet.</span>
						<span>To know thee, Lord, is worth a many tears;</span>
						<span>And when this mildew, age, has dried away,</span>
						<span>My heart will beat again as young and strong and gay.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">17.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Stronger and gayer tenfold!—but, O friends,</span>
						<span>Not for itself, nor any hoarded bliss.</span>
						<span>I see but vaguely whither my being tends,</span>
						<span>All vaguely spy a glory shadow-blent,</span>
						<span>Vaguely desire the "individual kiss;"</span>
						<span>But when I think of God, a large content</span>
						<span>Fills the dull air of my gray cloudy tent.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">18.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Father of me, thou art my bliss secure.</span>
						<span>Make of me, maker, whatsoe'er thou wilt.</span>
						<span>Let fancy's wings hang moulting, hope grow poor,</span>
						<span>And doubt steam up from where a joy was spilt—</span>
						<span>I lose no time to reason it plain and clear,</span>
						<span>But fly to thee, my life's perfection dear:—</span>
						<span>Not what I think, but what thou art, makes sure.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">19.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>This utterance of spirit through still thought,</span>
						<span>This forming of heart-stuff in moulds of brain,</span>
						<span>Is helpful to the soul by which 'tis wrought,</span>
						<span>The shape reacting on the heart again;</span>
						<span>But when I am quite old, and words are slow,</span>
						<span>Like dying things that keep their holes for woe,</span>
						<span>And memory's withering tendrils clasp with effort vain?</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">20.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Thou, then as now, no less wilt be my life,</span>
						<span>And I shall know it better than before,</span>
						<span>Praying and trusting, hoping, claiming more.</span>
						<span>From effort vain, sick foil, and bootless strife,</span>
						<span>I shall, with childness fresh, look up to thee;</span>
						<span>Thou, seeing thy child with age encumbered sore,</span>
						<span>Wilt round him bend thine arm more carefully.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">21.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>And when grim Death doth take me by the throat,</span>
						<span>Thou wilt have pity on thy handiwork;</span>
						<span>Thou wilt not let him on my suffering gloat,</span>
						<span>But draw my soul out—gladder than man or boy,</span>
						<span>When thy saved creatures from the narrow ark</span>
						<span>Rushed out, and leaped and laughed and cried for joy,</span>
						<span>And the great rainbow strode across the dark.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">22.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Against my fears, my doubts, my ignorance,</span>
						<span>I trust in thee, O father of my Lord!</span>
						<span>The world went on in this same broken dance,</span>
						<span>When, worn and mocked, he trusted and adored:</span>
						<span>I too will trust, and gather my poor best</span>
						<span>To face the truth-faced false. So in his nest</span>
						<span>I shall awake at length, a little scarred and scored.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">23.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Things cannot look all right so long as I</span>
						<span>Am not all right who see—therefore not right</span>
						<span>Can see. The lamp within sends out the light</span>
						<span>Which shows the things; and if its rays go wry,</span>
						<span>Or are not white, they must part show a lie.</span>
						<span>The man, half-cured, did men not trees conclude,</span>
						<span>Because he moving saw what else had seemed a wood.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">24.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Give me, take from me, as thou wilt. I learn—</span>
						<span>Slowly and stubbornly I learn to yield</span>
						<span>With a strange hopefulness. As from the field</span>
						<span>Of hard-fought battle won, the victor chief</span>
						<span>Turns thankfully, although his heart do yearn,</span>
						<span>So from my old things to thy new I turn,</span>
						<span>With sad, thee-trusting heart, and not in grief.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">25.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>If with my father I did wander free,</span>
						<span>Floating o'er hill and field where'er we would,</span>
						<span>And, lighting on the sward before the door,</span>
						<span>Strange faces through the window-panes should see,</span>
						<span>And strange feet standing where the loved had stood,</span>
						<span>The dear old place theirs all, as ours before—</span>
						<span>Should I be sorrowful, father, having thee?</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">26.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>So, Lord, if thou tak'st from me all the rest,</span>
						<span>Thyself with each resumption drawing nigher,</span>
						<span>It shall but hurt me as the thorn of the briar,</span>
						<span>When I reach to the pale flower in its breast.</span>
						<span>To have thee, Lord, is to have all thy best,</span>
						<span>Holding it by its very life divine—</span>
						<span>To let my friend's hand go, and take his heart in mine.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">27.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Take from me leisure, all familiar places;</span>
						<span>Take all the lovely things of earth and air</span>
						<span>Take from me books; take all my precious faces;</span>
						<span>Take words melodious, and their songful linking;</span>
						<span>Take scents, and sounds, and all thy outsides fair;</span>
						<span>Draw nearer, taking, and, to my sober thinking,</span>
						<span>Thou bring'st them nearer all, and ready to my prayer.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">28.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>No place on earth henceforth I shall count strange,</span>
						<span>For every place belongeth to my Christ.</span>
						<span>I will go calm where'er thou bid'st me range;</span>
						<span>Whoe'er my neighbour, thou art still my nighest.</span>
						<span>Oh my heart's life, my owner, will of my being!</span>
						<span>Into my soul thou every moment diest,</span>
						<span>In thee my life thus evermore decreeing.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">29.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>What though things change and pass, nor come again!</span>
						<span>Thou, the life-heart of all things, changest never.</span>
						<span>The sun shines on; the fair clouds turn to rain,</span>
						<span>And glad the earth with many a spring and river.</span>
						<span>The hearts that answer change with chill and shiver,</span>
						<span>That mourn the past, sad-sick, with hopeless pain,</span>
						<span>They know not thee, our changeless heart and brain.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">30.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>My halting words will some day turn to song—</span>
						<span>Some far-off day, in holy other times!</span>
						<span>The melody now prisoned in my rimes</span>
						<span>Will one day break aloft, and from the throng</span>
						<span>Of wrestling thoughts and words spring up the air;</span>
						<span>As from the flower its colour's sweet despair</span>
						<span>Issues in odour, and the sky's low levels climbs.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">31.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>My surgent thought shoots lark-like up to thee.</span>
						<span>Thou like the heaven art all about the lark.</span>
						<span>Whatever I surmise or know in me,</span>
						<span>Idea, or but symbol on the dark,</span>
						<span>Is living, working, thought-creating power</span>
						<span>In thee, the timeless father of the hour.</span>
						<span>I am thy book, thy song—thy child would be.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</section>
			<section id="the-diary-of-an-old-soul-november">
				<header>
					<h2>November</h2>
				</header>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">1.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>THOU art of this world, Christ. Thou know'st it all;</span>
						<span>Thou know'st our evens, our morns, our red and gray;</span>
						<span>How moons, and hearts, and seasons rise and fall;</span>
						<span>How we grow weary plodding on the way;</span>
						<span>Of future joy how present pain bereaves,</span>
						<span>Rounding us with a dark of mere decay,</span>
						<span>Tossed with a drift Of summer-fallen leaves.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">2.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Thou knowest all our weeping, fainting, striving;</span>
						<span>Thou know'st how very hard it is to be;</span>
						<span>How hard to rouse faint will not yet reviving;</span>
						<span>To do the pure thing, trusting all to thee;</span>
						<span>To hold thou art there, for all no face we see;</span>
						<span>How hard to think, through cold and dark and dearth,</span>
						<span>That thou art nearer now than when eye-seen on earth.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">3.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Have pity on us for the look of things,</span>
						<span>When blank denial stares us in the face.</span>
						<span>Although the serpent mask have lied before,</span>
						<span>It fascinates the bird that darkling sings,</span>
						<span>And numbs the little prayer-bird's beating wings.</span>
						<span>For how believe thee somewhere in blank space,</span>
						<span>If through the darkness come no knocking to our door?</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">4.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>If we might sit until the darkness go,</span>
						<span>Possess our souls in patience perhaps we might;</span>
						<span>But there is always something to be done,</span>
						<span>And no heart left to do it. To and fro</span>
						<span>The dull thought surges, as the driven waves fight</span>
						<span>In gulfy channels. Oh! victorious one,</span>
						<span>Give strength to rise, go out, and meet thee in the night.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">5.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>"Wake, thou that sleepest; rise up from the dead,</span>
						<span>And Christ will give thee light." I do not know</span>
						<span>What sleep is, what is death, or what is light;</span>
						<span>But I am waked enough to feel a woe,</span>
						<span>To rise and leave death. Stumbling through the night,</span>
						<span>To my dim lattice, O calling Christ! I go,</span>
						<span>And out into the dark look for thy star-crowned head.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">6.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>There are who come to me, and write, and send,</span>
						<span>Whom I would love, giving good things to all,</span>
						<span>But friend—that name I cannot on them spend;</span>
						<span>'Tis from the centre of self-love they call</span>
						<span>For cherishing—for which they first must know</span>
						<span>How to be still, and take the seat that's low:</span>
						<span>When, Lord, shall I be fit—when wilt thou call me friend?</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">7.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Wilt thou not one day, Lord? In all my wrong,</span>
						<span>Self-love and weakness, laziness and fear,</span>
						<span>This one thing I can say: I am content</span>
						<span>To be and have what in thy heart I am meant</span>
						<span>To be and have. In my best times I long</span>
						<span>After thy will, and think it glorious-dear;</span>
						<span>Even in my worst, perforce my will to thine is bent.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">8.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>My God, I look to thee for tenderness</span>
						<span>Such as I could not seek from any man,</span>
						<span>Or in a human heart fancy or plan—</span>
						<span>A something deepest prayer will not express:</span>
						<span>Lord, with thy breath blow on my being's fires,</span>
						<span>Until, even to the soul with self-love wan,</span>
						<span>I yield the primal love, that no return desires.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">9.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Only no word of mine must ever foster</span>
						<span>The self that in a brother's bosom gnaws;</span>
						<span>I may not fondle failing, nor the boaster</span>
						<span>Encourage with the breath of my applause.</span>
						<span>Weakness needs pity, sometimes love's rebuke;</span>
						<span>Strength only sympathy deserves and draws—</span>
						<span>And grows by every faithful loving look.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">10.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>'Tis but as men draw nigh to thee, my Lord,</span>
						<span>They can draw nigh each other and not hurt.</span>
						<span>Who with the gospel of thy peace are girt,</span>
						<span>The belt from which doth hang the Spirit's sword,</span>
						<span>Shall breathe on dead bones, and the bones shall live,</span>
						<span>Sweet poison to the evil self shall give,</span>
						<span>And, clean themselves, lift men clean from the mire abhorred.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">11.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>My Lord, I have no clothes to come to thee;</span>
						<span>My shoes are pierced and broken with the road;</span>
						<span>I am torn and weathered, wounded with the goad,</span>
						<span>And soiled with tugging at my weary load:</span>
						<span>The more I need thee! A very prodigal</span>
						<span>I stagger into thy presence, Lord of me:</span>
						<span>One look, my Christ, and at thy feet I fall!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">12.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Why should I still hang back, like one in a dream,</span>
						<span>Who vainly strives to clothe himself aright,</span>
						<span>That in great presence he may seemly seem?</span>
						<span>Why call up feeling?—dress me in the faint,</span>
						<span>Worn, faded, cast-off nimbus of some saint?</span>
						<span>Why of old mood bring back a ghostly gleam—</span>
						<span>While there He waits, love's heart and loss's blight!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">13.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Son of the Father, elder brother mine,</span>
						<span>See thy poor brother's plight; See how he stands</span>
						<span>Defiled and feeble, hanging down his hands!</span>
						<span>Make me clean, brother, with thy burning shine;</span>
						<span>From thy rich treasures, householder divine,</span>
						<span>Bring forth fair garments, old and new, I pray,</span>
						<span>And like thy brother dress me, in the old home-bred way.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">14.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>My prayer-bird was cold—would not away,</span>
						<span>Although I set it on the edge of the nest.</span>
						<span>Then I bethought me of the story old—</span>
						<span>Love-fact or loving fable, thou know'st best—</span>
						<span>How, when the children had made sparrows of clay,</span>
						<span>Thou mad'st them birds, with wings to flutter and fold:</span>
						<span>Take, Lord, my prayer in thy hand, and make it pray.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">15.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>My poor clay-sparrow seems turned to a stone,</span>
						<span>And from my heart will neither fly nor run.</span>
						<span>I cannot feel as thou and I both would,</span>
						<span>But, Father, I am willing—make me good.</span>
						<span>What art thou father for, but to help thy son?</span>
						<span>Look deep, yet deeper, in my heart, and there,</span>
						<span>Beyond where I can feel, read thou the prayer.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">16.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Oh what it were to be right sure of thee!</span>
						<span>Sure that thou art, and the same as thy son, Jesus!</span>
						<span>Oh, faith is deeper, wider than the sea,</span>
						<span>Yea, than the blue of heaven that ever flees us!</span>
						<span>Yet simple as the cry of sore-hurt child,</span>
						<span>Or as his shout, with sudden gladness wild,</span>
						<span>When home from school he runs, till morn set free.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">17.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>If I were sure thou, Father, verily art,</span>
						<span>True father of the Nazarene as true,</span>
						<span>Sure as I am of my wife's shielding heart,</span>
						<span>Sure as of sunrise in the watching blue,</span>
						<span>Sure as I am that I do eat and drink,</span>
						<span>And have a heart to love and laugh and think,</span>
						<span>Meseems in flame the joy might from my body start.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">18.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>But I must know thee in a deeper way</span>
						<span>Than any of these ways, or know thee not;</span>
						<span>My heart at peace far loftier proof must lay</span>
						<span>Than if the wind thou me the wave didst roll,</span>
						<span>Than if I lay before thee a sunny spot,</span>
						<span>Or knew thee as the body knows its soul,</span>
						<span>Or even as the part doth know its perfect whole.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">19.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>There is no word to tell how I must know thee;</span>
						<span>No wind clasped ever a low meadow-flower</span>
						<span>So close that as to nearness it could show thee;</span>
						<span>No rainbow so makes one the sun and shower.</span>
						<span>A something with thee, I am a nothing fro' thee.</span>
						<span>Because I am not save as I am in thee,</span>
						<span>My soul is ever setting out to win thee.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">20.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I know not how—for that I first must know thee.</span>
						<span>I know I know thee not as I would know thee,</span>
						<span>For my heart burns like theirs that did not know him,</span>
						<span>Till he broke bread, and therein they must know him.</span>
						<span>I know thee, knowing that I do not know thee,</span>
						<span>Nor ever shall till one with me I know thee—</span>
						<span>Even as thy son, the eternal man, doth know thee.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">21.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Creation under me, in, and above,</span>
						<span>Slopes upward from the base, a pyramid,</span>
						<span>On whose point I shall stand at last, and love.</span>
						<span>From the first rush of vapour at thy will,</span>
						<span>To the last poet-word that darkness chid,</span>
						<span>Thou hast been sending up creation's hill,</span>
						<span>To lift thy souls aloft in faithful Godhead free.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">22.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I think my thought, and fancy I think thee.—</span>
						<span>Lord, wake me up; rend swift my coffin-planks;</span>
						<span>I pray thee, let me live—alive and free.</span>
						<span>My soul will break forth in melodious thanks,</span>
						<span>Aware at last what thou wouldst have it be,</span>
						<span>When thy life shall be light in me, and when</span>
						<span>My life to thine is answer and amen.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">23.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>How oft I say the same things in these lines!</span>
						<span>Even as a man, buried in during dark,</span>
						<span>Turns ever where the edge of twilight shines,</span>
						<span>Prays ever towards the vague eternal mark;</span>
						<span>Or as the sleeper, having dreamed he drinks,</span>
						<span>Back straightway into thirstful dreaming sinks,</span>
						<span>So turns my will to thee, for thee still longs, still pines.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">24.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>The mortal man, all careful, wise, and troubled,</span>
						<span>The eternal child in the nursery doth keep.</span>
						<span>To-morrow on to-day the man heaps doubled;</span>
						<span>The child laughs, hopeful, even in his sleep.</span>
						<span>The man rebukes the child for foolish trust;</span>
						<span>The child replies, "Thy care is for poor dust;</span>
						<span>Be still, and let me wake that thou mayst sleep."</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">25.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Till I am one, with oneness manifold,</span>
						<span>I must breed contradiction, strife, and doubt;</span>
						<span>Things tread Thy court—look real—take proving hold—</span>
						<span>My Christ is not yet grown to cast them out;</span>
						<span>Alas! to me, false-judging 'twixt the twain,</span>
						<span>The Unseen oft fancy seems, while, all about,</span>
						<span>The Seen doth lord it with a mighty train.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">26.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>But when the Will hath learned obedience royal,</span>
						<span>He straight will set the child upon the throne;</span>
						<span>To whom the seen things all, grown instant loyal,</span>
						<span>Will gather to his feet, in homage prone—</span>
						<span>The child their master they have ever known;</span>
						<span>Then shall the visible fabric plainly lean</span>
						<span>On a Reality that never can be seen.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">27.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Thy ways are wonderful, maker of men!</span>
						<span>Thou gavest me a child, and I have fed</span>
						<span>And clothed and loved her, many a growing year;</span>
						<span>Lo! now a friend of months draws gently near,</span>
						<span>And claims her future—all beyond his ken—</span>
						<span>There he hath never loved her nor hath led:</span>
						<span>She weeps and moans, but turns, and leaves her home so dear.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">28.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>She leaves, but not forsakes. Oft in the night,</span>
						<span>Oft at mid-day when all is still around,</span>
						<span>Sudden will rise, in dim pathetic light,</span>
						<span>Some childish memory of household bliss,</span>
						<span>Or sorrow by love's service robed and crowned;</span>
						<span>Rich in his love, she yet will sometimes miss</span>
						<span>The mother's folding arms, the mother's sealing kiss.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">29.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Then first, I think, our eldest-born, although</span>
						<span>Loving, devoted, tender, watchful, dear,</span>
						<span>The innermost of home-bred love shall know!</span>
						<span>Yea, when at last the janitor draws near,</span>
						<span>A still, pale joy will through the darkness go,</span>
						<span>At thought of lying in those arms again,</span>
						<span>Which once were heaven enough for any pain.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">30.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>By love doth love grow mighty in its love:</span>
						<span>Once thou shalt love us, child, as we love thee.</span>
						<span>Father of loves, is it not thy decree</span>
						<span>That, by our long, far-wandering remove</span>
						<span>From thee, our life, our home, our being blest,</span>
						<span>We learn at last to love thee true and best,</span>
						<span>And rush with all our loves back to thy infinite rest?</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</section>
			<section id="the-diary-of-an-old-soul-december">
				<header>
					<h3>December</h3>
				</header>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">1.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I AM a little weary of my life—</span>
						<span>Not thy life, blessed Father! Or the blood</span>
						<span>Too slowly laves the coral shores of thought,</span>
						<span>Or I am weary of weariness and strife.</span>
						<span>Open my soul-gates to thy living flood;</span>
						<span>I ask not larger heart-throbs, vigour-fraught,</span>
						<span>I pray thy presence, with strong patience rife.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">2.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I will what thou will'st—only keep me sure</span>
						<span>That thou art willing; call to me now and then.</span>
						<span>So, ceasing to enjoy, I shall endure</span>
						<span>With perfect patience—willing beyond my ken</span>
						<span>Beyond my love, beyond my thinking scope;</span>
						<span>Willing to be because thy will is pure;</span>
						<span>Willing thy will beyond all bounds of hope.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">3.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>This weariness of mine, may it not come</span>
						<span>From something that doth need no setting right?</span>
						<span>Shall fruit be blamed if it hang wearily</span>
						<span>A day before it perfected drop plumb</span>
						<span>To the sad earth from off its nursing tree?</span>
						<span>Ripeness must always come with loss of might.</span>
						<span>The weary evening fall before the resting night.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">4.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Hither if I have come through earth and air,</span>
						<span>Through fire and water—I am not of them;</span>
						<span>Born in the darkness, what fair-flashing gem</span>
						<span>Would to the earth go back and nestle there?</span>
						<span>Not of this world, this world my life doth hem;</span>
						<span>What if I weary, then, and look to the door,</span>
						<span>Because my unknown life is swelling at the core?</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">5.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>All winged things came from the waters first;</span>
						<span>Airward still many a one from the water springs</span>
						<span>In dens and caves wind-loving things are nursed:—</span>
						<span>I lie like unhatched bird, upfolded, dumb,</span>
						<span>While all the air is trembling with the hum</span>
						<span>Of songs and beating hearts and whirring wings,</span>
						<span>That call my slumbering life to wake to happy things.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">6.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I lay last night and knew not why I was sad.</span>
						<span>"'Tis well with God," I said, "and he is the truth;</span>
						<span>Let that content me."—'Tis not strength, nor youth,</span>
						<span>Nor buoyant health, nor a heart merry-mad,</span>
						<span>That makes the fact of things wherein men live:</span>
						<span>He is the life, and doth my life outgive;</span>
						<span>In him there is no gloom, but all is solemn-glad,</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">7.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I said to myself, "Lo, I lie in a dream</span>
						<span>Of separation, where there comes no sign;</span>
						<span>My waking life is hid with Christ in God,</span>
						<span>Where all is true and potent—fact divine."</span>
						<span>I will not heed the thing that doth but seem;</span>
						<span>I will be quiet as lark upon the sod;</span>
						<span>God's will, the seed, shall rest in me the pod.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">8.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>And when that will shall blossom—then, my God,</span>
						<span>There will be jubilation in a world!</span>
						<span>The glad lark, soaring heavenward from the sod,</span>
						<span>Up the swift spiral of its own song whirled,</span>
						<span>Never such jubilation wild out-poured</span>
						<span>As from my soul will break at thy feet, Lord,</span>
						<span>Like a great tide from sea-heart shoreward hurled.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">9.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>For then thou wilt be able, then at last,</span>
						<span>To glad me as thou hungerest to do;</span>
						<span>Then shall thy life my heart all open find,</span>
						<span>A thoroughfare to thy great spirit-wind;</span>
						<span>Then shall I rest within thy holy vast,</span>
						<span>One with the bliss of the eternal mind;</span>
						<span>And all creation rise in me created new.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">10.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>What makes thy being a bliss shall then make mind</span>
						<span>For I shall love as thou, and love in thee;</span>
						<span>Then shall I have whatever I desire,</span>
						<span>My every faintest wish being all divine;</span>
						<span>Power thou wilt give me to work mightily,</span>
						<span>Even as my Lord, leading thy low men nigher,</span>
						<span>With dance and song to cast their best upon thy fire.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">11.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Then shall I live such an essential life</span>
						<span>That a mere flower will then to me unfold</span>
						<span>More bliss than now grandest orchestral strife—</span>
						<span>By love made and obedience humble-bold,</span>
						<span>I shall straight through its window God behold.</span>
						<span>God, I shall feed on thee, thy creature blest</span>
						<span>With very being—work at one with sweetest rest.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">12.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Give me a world, to part for praise and sunder.</span>
						<span>The brooks be bells; the winds, in caverns dumb,</span>
						<span>Wake fife and flute and flageolet and voice;</span>
						<span>The fire-shook earth itself be the great drum;</span>
						<span>And let the air the region's bass out thunder;</span>
						<span>The firs be violins; the reeds hautboys;</span>
						<span>Rivers, seas, icebergs fill the great score up and under!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">13.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>But rather dost thou hear the blundered words</span>
						<span>Of breathing creatures; the music-lowing herds</span>
						<span>Of thy great cattle; thy soft-bleating sheep;</span>
						<span>O'erhovered by the trebles of thy birds,</span>
						<span>Whose Christ-praised carelessness song-fills the deep;</span>
						<span>Still rather a child's talk who apart doth hide him,</span>
						<span>And make a tent for God to come and sit beside him.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">14.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>This is not life; this being is not enough.</span>
						<span>But thou art life, and thou hast life for me.</span>
						<span>Thou mad'st the worm—to cast the wormy slough,</span>
						<span>And fly abroad—a glory flit and flee.</span>
						<span>Thou hast me, statue-like, hewn in the rough,</span>
						<span>Meaning at last to shape me perfectly.</span>
						<span>Lord, thou hast called me fourth, I turn and call on thee.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">15.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>'Tis thine to make, mine to rejoice in thine.</span>
						<span>As, hungering for his mother's face and eyes,</span>
						<span>The child throws wide the door, back to the wall,</span>
						<span>I run to thee, the refuge from poor lies:</span>
						<span>Lean dogs behind me whimper, yelp, and whine;</span>
						<span>Life lieth ever sick, Death's writhing thrall,</span>
						<span>In slavery endless, hopeless, and supine.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">16.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>The life that hath not willed itself to be,</span>
						<span>Must clasp the life that willed, and be at peace;</span>
						<span>Or, like a leaf wind-blown, through chaos flee;</span>
						<span>A life-husk into which the demons go,</span>
						<span>And work their will, and drive it to and fro;</span>
						<span>A thing that neither is, nor yet can cease,</span>
						<span>Which uncreation can alone release.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">17.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>But when I turn and grasp the making hand,</span>
						<span>And will the making will, with confidence</span>
						<span>I ride the crest of the creation-wave,</span>
						<span>Helpless no more, no more existence' slave;</span>
						<span>In the heart of love's creating fire I stand,</span>
						<span>And, love-possessed in heart and soul and sense,</span>
						<span>Take up the making share the making Master gave.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">18.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>That man alone who does the Father's works</span>
						<span>Can be the Father's son; yea, only he</span>
						<span>Who sonlike can create, can ever be;</span>
						<span>Who with God wills not, is no son, not free.</span>
						<span>O Father, send the demon-doubt that lurks</span>
						<span>Behind the hope, out into the abyss;</span>
						<span>Who trusts in knowledge all its good shall miss.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">19.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Thy beasts are sinless, and do live before thee;</span>
						<span>Thy child is sinful, and must run to thee.</span>
						<span>Thy angels sin not and in peace adore thee;</span>
						<span>But I must will, or never more be free.</span>
						<span>I from thy heart came, how can I ignore thee?—</span>
						<span>Back to my home I hurry, haste, and flee;</span>
						<span>There I shall dwell, love-praising evermore thee.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">20.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>My holy self, thy pure ideal, lies</span>
						<span>Calm in thy bosom, which it cannot leave;</span>
						<span>My self unholy, no ideal, hies</span>
						<span>Hither and thither, gathering store to grieve—</span>
						<span>Not now, O Father! now it mounts, it flies,</span>
						<span>To join the true self in thy heart that waits,</span>
						<span>And, one with it, be one with all the heavenly mates.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">21.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Trusting thee, Christ, I kneel, and clasp thy knee;</span>
						<span>Cast myself down, and kiss thy brother-feet—</span>
						<span>One self thou and the Father's thought of thee!</span>
						<span>Ideal son, thou hast left the perfect home,</span>
						<span>Ideal brother, to seek thy brothers come!</span>
						<span>Thou know'st our angels all, God's children sweet,</span>
						<span>And of each two wilt make one holy child complete.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">22.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>To a slow end I draw these daily words,</span>
						<span>Nor think such words often to write again—</span>
						<span>Rather, as light the power to me affords,</span>
						<span>Christ's new and old would to my friends unbind;</span>
						<span>Through words he spoke help to his thought behind;</span>
						<span>Unveil the heart with which he drew his men;</span>
						<span>Set forth his rule o'er devils, animals, corn, and wind.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">23.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I do remember how one time I thought,</span>
						<span>"God must be lonely—oh, so lonely lone!</span>
						<span>I will be very good to him—ah, nought</span>
						<span>Can reach the heart of his great loneliness!</span>
						<span>My whole heart I will bring him, with a moan</span>
						<span>That I may not come nearer; I will lie prone</span>
						<span>Before the awful loveliness in loneliness' excess."</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">24.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>A God must have a God for company.</span>
						<span>And lo! thou hast the Son-God to thy friend.</span>
						<span>Thou honour'st his obedience, he thy law.</span>
						<span>Into thy secret life-will he doth see;</span>
						<span>Thou fold'st him round in live love perfectly—</span>
						<span>One two, without beginning, without end;</span>
						<span>In love, life, strength, and truth, perfect without a flaw.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">25.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Thou hast not made, or taught me, Lord, to care</span>
						<span>For times and seasons—but this one glad day</span>
						<span>Is the blue sapphire clasping all the lights</span>
						<span>That flash in the girdle of the year so fair—</span>
						<span>When thou wast born a man, because alway</span>
						<span>Thou wast and art a man, through all the flights</span>
						<span>Of thought, and time, and thousandfold creation's play.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">26.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>We all are lonely, Maker—each a soul</span>
						<span>Shut in by itself, a sundered atom of thee.</span>
						<span>No two yet loved themselves into a whole;</span>
						<span>Even when we weep together we are two.</span>
						<span>Of two to make one, which yet two shall be,</span>
						<span>Is thy creation's problem, deep, and true,</span>
						<span>To which thou only hold'st the happy, hurting clue.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">27.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>No less than thou, O Father, do we need</span>
						<span>A God to friend each lonely one of us.</span>
						<span>As touch not in the sack two grains of seed,</span>
						<span>Touch no two hearts in great worlds populous.</span>
						<span>Outside the making God we cannot meet</span>
						<span>Him he has made our brother: homeward, thus,</span>
						<span>To find our kin we first must turn our wandering feet.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">28.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>It must be possible that the soul made</span>
						<span>Should absolutely meet the soul that makes;</span>
						<span>Then, in that bearing soul, meet every other</span>
						<span>There also born, each sister and each brother.</span>
						<span>Lord, till I meet thee thus, life is delayed;</span>
						<span>I am not I until that morning breaks,</span>
						<span>Not I until my consciousness eternal wakes.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">29.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Again I shall behold thee, daughter true;</span>
						<span>The hour will come when I shall hold thee fast</span>
						<span>In God's name, loving thee all through and through.</span>
						<span>Somewhere in his grand thought this waits for us.</span>
						<span>Then shall I see a smile not like thy last—</span>
						<span>For that great thing which came when all was past,</span>
						<span>Was not a smile, but God's peace glorious.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">30.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Twilight of the transfiguration-joy,</span>
						<span>Gleam-faced, pure-eyed, strong-willed, high-hearted boy!</span>
						<span>Hardly thy life clear forth of heaven was sent,</span>
						<span>Ere it broke out into a smile, and went.</span>
						<span>So swift thy growth, so true thy goalward bent,</span>
						<span>Thou, child and sage inextricably blent,</span>
						<span>Wilt one day teach thy father in some heavenly tent</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal">31.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Go, my beloved children, live your life.</span>
						<span>Wounded, faint, bleeding, never yield the strife.</span>
						<span>Stunned, fallen-awake, arise, and fight again.</span>
						<span>Before you victory stands, with shining train</span>
						<span>Of hopes not credible until they are.</span>
						<span>Beyond morass and mountain swells the star</span>
						<span>Of perfect love—the home of longing heart and brain</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</section>
		</article>
		<article id="a-threefold-cord" epub:type="poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">A Threefold Cord</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">Poems by Three Friends</p>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-dedication" epub:type="dedication">
				<header>
					<h3 hidden="hidden">Dedication</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">To<br/>
					Greville Matheson MacDonald.</p>
				</header>
				<div epub:type="poem">
					<p>
						<span>First, most, to thee, my son, I give this book</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">In which a friend's and brother's verses blend</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">With mine; for not son only—brother, friend,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Art thou, through sonship which no veil can brook</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Between the eyes that in each other look,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Or any shadow 'twixt the hearts that tend</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Still nearer, with divine approach, to end</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In love eternal that cannot be shook</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">When all the shakable shall cease to be.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">With growing hope I greet the coming day</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">When from thy journey done I welcome thee</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Who sharest in the names of all the three,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And take thee to the two, and humbly say,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">
							<i>Let this man be the fourth with us, I pray.</i>
						</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<footer>
					<p>Casa Coraggio:</p>
					<p>May, 1883.</p>
				</footer>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-the-haunted-house" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Haunted House</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Suggested by a drawing of Thomas Moran, the American painter.</p>
				</header>
				<div>
					<p>
						<span>This must be the very night!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The moon knows it!—and the trees!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They stand straight upright,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Each a sentinel drawn up,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As if they dared not know</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which way the wind might blow!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The very pool, with dead gray eye,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dully expectant, feels it nigh,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And begins to curdle and freeze!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And the dark night,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With its fringe of light,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Holds the secret in its cup!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">What can it be, to make</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The poplars cease to shiver and shake,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And up in the dismal air</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Stand straight and stiff as the human hair</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When the human soul is dizzy with dread—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All but those two that strain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Aside in a frenzy of speechless pain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though never a wind sends out a breath</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To tunnel the foggy rheum of death?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What can it be has power to scare</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The full-grown moon to the idiot stare</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of a blasted eye in the midnight air?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Something has gone wrong;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A scream will come tearing out ere long!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">Still as death,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Although I listen with bated breath!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet something is coming, I know—is coming!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With an inward soundless humming</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Somewhere in me, or if in the air</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I cannot tell, but it is there!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Marching on to an unheard drumming</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Something is coming—coming—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Growing and coming!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And the moon is aware,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Aghast in the air</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At the thing that is only coming</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With an inward soundless humming</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And an unheard spectral drumming!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">Nothing to see and nothing to hear!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Only across the inner sky</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The wing of a shadowy thought flits by,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Vague and featureless, faceless, drear—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Only a thinness to catch the eye:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is it a dim foreboding unborn,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or a buried memory, wasted and worn</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As the fading frost of a wintry sigh?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Anon I shall have it!—anon!—it draws nigh!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A night when—a something it was took place</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That drove the blood from that scared moon-face!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hark! was that the cry of a goat,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or the gurgle of water in a throat?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hush! there is nothing to see or hear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Only a silent something is near;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No knock, no footsteps three or four,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Only a presence outside the door!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>See! the moon is remembering!—what?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The wail of a mother-left, lie-alone brat?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or a raven sharpening its beak to peck?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or a cold blue knife and a warm white neck?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or only a heart that burst and ceased</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For a man that went away released?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I know not—know not, but something is coming</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Somehow back with an inward humming!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">Ha! look there! look at that house,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Forsaken of all things, beetle and mouse!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mark how it looks! It must have a soul!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It looks, it looks, though it cannot stir!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>See the ribs of it, how they stare!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Its blind eyes yet have a seeing air!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It <i>knows</i> it has a soul!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Haggard it hangs o'er the slimy pool,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And gapes wide open as corpses gape:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It is the very murderer!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The ghost has modelled himself to the shape</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of this drear house all sodden with woe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where the deed was done, long, long ago,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And filled with himself his new body full—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To haunt for ever his ghastly crime,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And see it come and go—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Brooding around it like motionless time,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With a mouth that gapes, and eyes that yawn</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Blear and blintering and full of the moon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like one aghast at a hellish dawn!—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The deed! the deed! it is coming soon!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">For, ever and always, when round the tune</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Grinds on the barrel of organ-Time,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The deed is done. And it comes anon:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>True to the roll of the clock-faced moon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>True to the ring of the spheric chime,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>True to the cosmic rhythm and rime,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Every point, as it first fell out,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Will come and go in the fearsome bout.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>See! palsied with horror from garret to core,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The house cannot shut its gaping door;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Its burst eye stares as if trying to see,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And it leans as if settling heavily,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Settling heavy with sickness dull:</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>It</i> also is hearing the soundless humming</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of the wheel that is turning—the thing that is coming!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On the naked rafters of its brain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Gaunt and wintred, see the train</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of gossiping, scandal-mongering crows</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That watch, all silent, with necks a-strain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wickedly knowing, with heads awry</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And the sharpened gleam of a cunning eye—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Watch, through the cracks of the ruined skull,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How the evil business goes!—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beyond the eyes of the cherubim,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beyond the ears of the seraphim,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Outside, forsaken, in the dim</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Phantom-haunted chaos grim</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He stands, with the deed going on in him!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">O winds, winds, that lurk and peep</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Under the edge of the moony fringe!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O winds, winds, up and sweep,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Up and blow and billow the air,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Billow the air with blow and swinge,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rend me this ghastly house of groans!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rend and scatter the skeleton's bones</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Over the deserts and mountains bare!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Blast and hurl and shiver aside</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nailed sticks and mortared stones!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Clear the phantom, with torrent and tide,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Out of the moon and out of my brain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That the light may fall shadowless in again!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">But, alas, then the ghost</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O'er mountain and coast</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Would go roaming, roaming! and never was swine</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That, grubbing and talking with snork and whine</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On Gadarene mountains, had taken him in</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But would rush to the lake to unhouse the sin!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For any charnel</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This ghost is too carnal;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There is no volcano, burnt out and cold,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whose very ashes are gray and old,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But would cast him forth in reviving flame</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To blister the sky with a smudge of shame!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">Is there no help? none anywhere</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Under the earth or above the air?—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Come, sad woman, whose tender throat</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Has a red-lipped mouth that can sing no note!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Child, whose midwife, the third grim Fate,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shears in hand, thy coming did wait!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Father, with blood-bedabbled hair!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mother, all withered with love's despair!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Come, broken heart, whatever thou be,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hasten to help this misery!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou wast only murdered, or left forlorn:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He is a horror, a hate, a scorn!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Come, if out of the holiest blue</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That the sapphire throne shines through;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For pity come, though thy fair feet stand</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Next to the elder-band;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fling thy harp on the hyaline,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hurry thee down the spheres divine;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Come, and drive those ravens away;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cover his eyes from the pitiless moon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shadow his brain from her stinging spray;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Droop around him, a tent of love,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>An odour of grace, a fanning dove;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Walk through the house with the healing tune</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of gentle footsteps; banish the shape</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Remorse calls up thyself to ape;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Comfort him, dear, with pardon sweet;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cool his heart from its burning heat</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With the water of life that laves the feet</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of the throne of God, and the holy street!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">O God, he is but a living blot,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet he lives by thee—for if thou wast not,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They would vanish together, self-forgot,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He and his crime:—one breathing blown</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From thy spirit on his would all atone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Scatter the horror, and bring relief</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In an amber dawn of holy grief!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>God, give him sorrow; arise from within,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His primal being, deeper than sin!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">Why do I tremble, a creature at bay?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>'Tis but a dream—I drive it away.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Back comes my breath, and my heart again</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pumps the red blood to my fainting brain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Released from the nightmare's nine-fold train:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>God is in heaven—yes, everywhere,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Love, the all-shining, will kill Despair!—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To the wall's blank eyeless space</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I turn the picture's face.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">But why is the moon so bare, up there?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And why is she so white?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And why does the moon so stare, up there—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Strangely stare, out of the night?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Why stand up the poplars</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That still way?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And why do those two of them</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Start astray?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And out of the black why hangs the gray?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Why does it hang down so, I say,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Over that house, like a fringed pall</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where the dead goes by in a funeral?—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Soul of mine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou the reason canst divine:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into <i>thee</i> the moon doth stare</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With pallid, terror-smitten air!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou, and the Horror lonely-stark,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Outcast of eternal dark,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are in nature same and one,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And <i>thy</i> story is not done!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So let the picture face thee from the wall,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And let its white moon stare!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-in-the-winter" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">In the Winter</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>In the winter, flowers are springing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the winter, woods are green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where our banished birds are singing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where our summer sun is seen!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our cold midnights are coeval</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With an evening and a morn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where the forest-gods hold revel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the spring is newly born!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>While the earth is full of fighting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While men rise and curse their day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While the foolish strong are smiting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the foolish weak betray—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The true hearts beyond are growing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The brave spirits work alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where Love's summer-wind is blowing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a truth-irradiate zone!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>While we cannot shape our living</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the beauty of our skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While man wants and earth is giving—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nature calls and man denies—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How the old worlds round Him gather</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where their Maker is their sun!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How the children know the Father</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where the will of God is done!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Daily woven with our story,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sounding far above our strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is a time-enclosing glory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is a space-absorbing life.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We can dream no dream Elysian,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is no good thing might be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But some angel has the vision,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But some human soul shall see!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Is thy strait horizon dreary?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is thy foolish fancy chill?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Change the feet that have grown weary</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the wings that never will.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Burst the flesh, and live the spirit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Haunt the beautiful and far;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou hast all things to inherit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a soul for every star.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-christmas-day-1878" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Christmas-Day, 1878</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I think I might be weary of this day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That comes inevitably every year,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The same when I was young and strong and gay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The same when I am old and growing sere—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I should grow weary of it every year</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that thou comest to me every day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I shall grow weary if thou every day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But come to me, Lord of eternal life;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shall grow weary thus to watch and pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For ever out of labour into strife;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Take everlasting house with me, my life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I shall be new-born this Christmas-day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thou art the Eternal Son, and born no day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But ever he the Father, thou the Son;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am his child, but being born alway—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How long, O Lord, how long till it be done?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be thou from endless years to years the Son—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I thy brother, new-born every day.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-the-new-year" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The New Year</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Be welcome, year! with corn and sickle come;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Make poor the body, but make rich the heart:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What man that bears his sheaves, gold-nodding, home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will heed the paint rubbed from his groaning cart!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nor leave behind thy fears and holy shames,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy sorrows on the horizon hanging low—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gray gathered fuel for the sunset-flames</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When joyous in death's harvest-home we go.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-two-rondels" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Two Rondels</h3>
				</header>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>When, in the mid-sea of the night,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">I waken at thy call, O Lord,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The first that troop my bark aboard</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are darksome imps that hate the light,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whose tongues are arrows, eyes a blight—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of wraths and cares a pirate horde—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though on the mid-sea of the night</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">It was thy call that waked me, Lord.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Then I must to my arms and fight—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Catch up my shield and two-edged sword,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The words of him who is thy word—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor cease till they are put to flight;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then in the mid-sea of the night</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">I turn and listen for thee, Lord.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>There comes no voice from thee, O Lord,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Across the mid-sea of the night!</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">I lift my voice and cry with might:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If thou keep silent, soon a horde</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of imps again will swarm aboard,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And I shall be in sorry plight</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If no voice come from thee, my Lord,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Across the mid-sea of the night.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>There comes no voice; I hear no word!</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">But in my soul dawns something bright:—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">There is no sea, no foe to fight!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy heart and mine beat one accord:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I need no voice from thee, O Lord,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Across the mid-sea of the night.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-heart-thou-must-learn-to-do-without" epub:type="poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Rondel</h3>
					<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">Heart, Thou Must Learn to Do Without—</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Heart, thou must learn to do without—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That is the riches of the poor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their liberty is to endure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wrap thou thine old cloak thee about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And carol loud and carol stout;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let thy rags fly, nor wish them fewer;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou too must learn to do without,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Must earn the riches of the poor!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Why should'st thou only wear no clout?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou only walk in love-robes pure?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why should thy step alone be sure?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou only free of fortune's flout?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nay, nay! but learn to go without,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so be humbly, richly poor.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-song-lighter-and-sweeter" epub:type="poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Song</h3>
					<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">Lighter and Sweeter</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Lighter and sweeter</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let your song be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for sorrow—oh cheat her</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With melody!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-smoke" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Smoke</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Lord, I have laid my heart upon thy altar</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But cannot get the wood to burn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It hardly flares ere it begins to falter</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the dark return.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Old sap, or night-fallen dew, makes damp the fuel;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In vain my breath would flame provoke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet see—at every poor attempt's renewal</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To thee ascends the smoke!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>'Tis all I have—smoke, failure, foiled endeavour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Coldness and doubt and palsied lack:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as I have I send thee!—perfect Giver,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Send thou thy lightning back.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-the-laverock" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Laverock</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">
						<i>The Man says:</i>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Laverock i' the lift,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hae ye nae sang-thrift,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>'At ye scatter 't sae heigh, and lat it a' drift?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i5">Wasterfu laverock!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Dinna ye ken</span>
					<br/>
					<span>'At ye hing ower men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wha haena a sang or a penny to spen?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i5">Hertless laverock!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But up there you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I' the bow o' the blue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Haud skirlin on as gien a' war new!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i5">Toom-heidit laverock!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Haith, ye're ower blythe!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I see a great scythe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swing whaur yer nestie lies, doon i' the lythe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i5">Liltin laverock!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eh, sic a soun!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Birdie, come doun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye're fey to sing sic a merry tune!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Gowkit laverock!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Come to yer nest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yer wife's sair prest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She's clean worn oot wi' duin her best!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Rovin laverock!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Winna ye haud?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye're surely mad!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is there naebody there to gie ye a dad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Menseless laverock?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Come doon and conform,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pyke an honest worm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hap yer bairns frae the comin storm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Spendrife laverock!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<i>The Bird sings:</i>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">My nestie it lieth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">I' the how o' a ban';</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The swing o' the scythe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">'Ill miss 't by a span.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">The lift it's sae cheery!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The win' it's sae free!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">I hing ower my dearie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And sing 'cause I see.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">My wifie's wee breistie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Grows warm wi' my sang,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And ilk crumpled-up beastie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Kens no to think lang.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">Up here the sun sings, but</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">He only shines there!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Ye haena nae wings, but</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Come up on a prayer.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<i>The man sings:</i>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">Ye wee daurin cratur,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Ye rant and ye sing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Like an oye o' auld Natur</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Ta'en hame by the king!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">Ye wee feathert priestie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Yer bells i' yer thro't,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Yer altar yer breistie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Yer mitre forgot—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">Offerin and Aaron,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Ye burn hert and brain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And dertin and daurin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Flee back to yer ain!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">Ye wee minor prophet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">It's 'maist my belief</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">'At I'm doon in Tophet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And you abune grief!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">Ye've deavt me and daudit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And ca'd me a fule:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">I'm nearhan' persuaudit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">To gang to your schule!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">For, birdie, I'm thinkin</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Ye ken mair nor me—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Gien ye haena been drinkin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And sing as ye see.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">Ye maun hae a sicht 'at</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Sees gay and far ben,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And a hert, for the micht o' 't,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Wad sair for nine men!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There's somebody's been til</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Roun saft to ye wha</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said birdies are seen til,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And e'en whan they fa'!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-to-a-certain-critic" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">To a Certain Critic</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Such guests as you, sir, were not in my mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I my homely dish with care designed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>'Twas certain humble souls I would have fed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who do not turn from wholesome milk and bread:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You came, slow-trotting on the narrow way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O'erturned the food, and trod it in the clay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then low with discoid nostrils sniffing curt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cried, "Sorry cook! why, what a mess of dirt!"</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-she-loves-thee-loves-thee-not" epub:type="poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Song</h3>
					<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">She Loves Thee, Loves Thee Not!</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>She loves thee, loves thee not!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, that is all, my heart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why should she take a part</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In every selfish blot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In every greedy spot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That now doth ache and smart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because she loves thee not—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not, not at all, poor heart!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thou art no such dove-cot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of virtues—no such chart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of highways, though the dart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of love be through thee shot!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why should she not love not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thee, poor, pinched, selfish heart?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-a-cry" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">A Cry</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Lord, hear my discontent: all blank I stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A mirror polished by thy hand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy sun's beams flash and flame from me—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I cannot help it: here I stand, there he!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To one of them I cannot say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go, and on yonder water play;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor one poor ragged daisy can I fashion—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I do not make the words of this my limping passion!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If I should say, Now I will think a thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, I must wait, unknowing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What thought in me is growing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until the thing to birth be brought!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor know I then what next will come</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From out the gulf of silence dumb:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am the door the thing will find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To pass into the general mind!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I cannot say <i>I think</i>—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I only stand upon the thought-well's brink:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From darkness to the sun the water bubbles up—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>lift it in my cup.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou only thinkest—I am thought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me and my thought thou thinkest. Nought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Am I but as a fountain spout</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From which thy water welleth out.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art the only one, the all in all.—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet when my soul on thee doth call</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou dost answer out of everywhere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I in thy allness have my perfect share.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-from-home" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">From Home</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Some men there are who cannot spare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A single tear until they feel</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The last cold pressure, and the heel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is stamped upon the outmost layer.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, waking, some will sigh to think</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The clouds have borrowed winter's wing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sad winter, when the grasses spring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No more about the fountain's brink.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And some would call me coward fool:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I lay a claim to better blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But yet a heap of idle mud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath power to make me sorrowful.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-to-my-mother-earth" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">To My Mother Earth</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>O Earth, Earth, Earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I am dying for love of thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For thou hast given me birth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thy hands have tended me.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I would fall asleep on thy breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When its swelling folds are bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the thrush dreams of its nest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the life of its joy in the air;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When thy life is a vanished ghost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the glory hath left thy waves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When thine eye is blind with frost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the fog sits on the graves;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When the blasts are shivering about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the rain thy branches beats,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the damps of death are out,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the mourners are in the streets.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Oh my sleep should be deep</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the arms of thy swiftening motion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And my dirge the mystic sweep</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the winds that nurse the ocean.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And my eye would slowly ope</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the voice that awakens thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And runs like a glance of hope</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Up through the quickening tree;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When the roots of the lonely fir</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are dipt in thy veining heat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thy countless atoms stir</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the gather of mossy feet;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When the sun's great censer swings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the hands that always be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the mists from thy watery rings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Go up like dust from the sea;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When the midnight airs are assembling</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With a gush in thy whispering halls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the leafy air is trembling</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like a stream before it falls.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thy shadowy hand hath found me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On the drifts of the Godhead's will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thy dust hath risen around me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With a life that guards me still.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O Earth! I have caught from thine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The pulse of a mystic chase;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Earth! I have drunk like wine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The life of thy swiftening race.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Wilt miss me, mother sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A life in thy milky veins?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wilt miss the sound of my feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the tramp that shakes thy plains</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When the jaws of darkness rend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the vapours fold away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the sounds of life ascend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like dust in the blinding day?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I would know thy silver strain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the shouts of the starry crowd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the souls of thy changing men</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rise up like an incense cloud.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I would know thy brightening lobes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the lap of thy watery bars</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though space were choked with globes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the night were blind with stars!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>From the folds of my unknown place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When my soul is glad and free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will slide by my God's sweet grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hang like a cloud on thee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When the pale moon sits at night</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By the brink of her shining well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Laving the rings of her widening light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On the slopes of the weltering swell,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I will fall like a wind from the west</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On the locks of thy prancing streams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sow the fields of thy rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With handfuls of sweet young dreams.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When the sound of thy children's cry</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath stricken thy gladness dumb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will kindle thine upward eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With a laugh from the years that come.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Far above where the loud wind raves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On a wing as still as snow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will watch the grind of the curly waves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As they bite the coasts below;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When the shining ranks of the frost</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Draw down on the glistening wold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the mail of a fairy host,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the earth is mossed with cold,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Till the plates that shine about</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Close up with a filmy din,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till the air is frozen out,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the stars are frozen in.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I will often stoop to range</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On the fields where my youth was spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And my feet shall smite the cliffs of change</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the rush of a steep descent;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And my glowing soul shall burn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With a love that knows no pall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And my eye of worship turn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon him that fashioned all—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When the sounding waves of strife</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have died on the Godhead's sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thy life is a purer life</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nurses a life in me.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-thy-heart" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Thy Heart</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Make not of thy heart a casket,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Opening seldom, quick to close;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But of bread a wide-mouthed basket,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or a cup that overflows.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-o-lord-how-happy" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">O Lord, How Happy!</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">From the German of Dessler.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>O Lord, how happy is the time</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When in thy love I rest!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When from my weariness I climb</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even to thy tender breast!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The night of sorrow endeth there—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou art brighter than the sun;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in thy pardon and thy care</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The heaven of heaven is won.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Let the world call herself my foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or let the world allure—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I care not for the world; I go</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To this dear friend and sure.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when life's fiercest storms are sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon life's wildest sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My little bark is confident</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because it holds by thee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When the law threatens endless death</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the dreadful hill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Straightway from her consuming breath</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My soul goeth higher still—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Goeth to Jesus, wounded, slain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And maketh him her home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence she will not go out again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And where death cannot come.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I do not fear the wilderness</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where thou hast been before;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nay rather will I daily press</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After thee, near thee, more!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art my food; on thee I lean,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou makest my heart sing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to thy heavenly pastures green</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All thy dear flock dost bring.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And if the gate that opens there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be dark to other men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is not dark to those who share</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The heart of Jesus then:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That is not losing much of life</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which is not losing thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who art as present in the strife</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As in the victory.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therefore how happy is the time</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When in thy love I rest!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When from my weariness I climb</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even to thy tender breast!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The night of sorrow endeth there—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou art brighter than the sun!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in thy pardon and thy care</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The heaven of heaven is won!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-no-sign" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">No Sign</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>O Lord, if on the wind, at cool of day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I heard one whispered word of mighty grace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If through the darkness, as in bed I lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But once had come a hand upon my face;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>If but one sign that might not be mistook</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had ever been, since first thy face I sought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I should not now be doubting o'er a book,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But serving thee with burning heart and thought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So dreams that heart. But to my heart I say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turning my face to front the dark and wind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such signs had only barred anew his way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into thee, longing heart, thee, wildered mind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They asked the very Way, where lies the way?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The very Son, where is the Father's face?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How he could show himself, if not in clay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who was the lord of spirit, form, and space!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>My being, Lord, will nevermore be whole</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Until thou come behind mine ears and eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enter and fill the temple of my soul</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With perfect contact—such a sweet surprise,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Such presence as, before it met the view,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The prophet-fancy could not once foresee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though every corner of the temple knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By very emptiness its need of thee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When I keep <i>all</i> thy words, no favoured some,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Heedless of worldly winds or judgment's tide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, Jesus, thou wilt with thy father come—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oh, ended prayers!—and in my soul abide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ah, long delay! ah, cunning, creeping sin!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I shall but fail, and cease at length to try:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Jesus, though thou wilt not yet come in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Knock at my window as thou passest by!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-the-chrysalis" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Chrysalis</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Methought I floated sightless, nor did know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I had ears until I heard the cry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As of a mighty man in agony:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"How long, Lord, shall I lie thus foul and slow?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The arrows of thy lightning through me go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sting and torture me—yet here I lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A shapeless mass that scarce can mould a sigh!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The darkness thinned; I saw a thing below</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like sheeted corpse, a knot at head and feet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slow clomb the sun the mountains of the dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And looked upon the world: the silence broke!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A blinding struggle! then the thunderous beat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of great exulting pinions stroke on stroke!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from that world a mighty angel fled.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-november-1851" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">November, 1851</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">What dost thou here, O soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond thy own control,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under the strange wild sky?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O stars, reach down your hands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And clasp me in your silver bands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I tremble with this mystery!—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flung hither by a chance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of restless circumstance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art but here, and wast not sent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet once more mayest thou draw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By thy own mystic law</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the centre of thy wonderment.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Why wilt thou stop and start?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Draw nearer, oh my heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I will question thee most wistfully;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gather thy last clear resolution</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To look upon thy dissolution.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">The great God's life throbs far and free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou art but a spark</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Known only in thy dark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or a foam-fleck upon the awful ocean,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thyself thy slender dignity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy own thy vexing mystery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the vast change that is not change but motion.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">'Tis not so hard as it would seem;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy life is but a dream—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet thou hast some thoughts about the past;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let go, let go thy memories,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They are not things but wandering cries—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wave them each one a long farewell at last:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I hear thee say—"Take them, O tide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I will turn aside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gazing with heedlessness, nay, even with laughter!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bind me, ye winds and storms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the things that once had forms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And carry me clean out of sight thereafter!"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Thou hast lived long enough</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To know thy own weak stuff,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Laughing thy fondest joys to utter scorn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give up the idle strife—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is but mockery of life;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fates had need of thee and thou wast born!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They are, in sooth, but thou shalt die.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O wandering spark! O homeless cry!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O empty will, still lacking self-intent!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look up among the autumn trees:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ripened fruits fall through the breeze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they will shake thee even like these</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the lap of an Accomplishment!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Thou hadst a faith, and voices said:—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Doubt not <i>that</i> truth, but bend thy head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the God who drew thee from the night:"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou liftedst up thy eyes—and, lo!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A host of voices answered—"No;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thousand things as good have seen the light!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look how the swarms arise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From every clod before thy eyes!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are thine the only hopes that fade and fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When to the centre of its action</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One purpose draws each separate fraction,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And nothing but effects are left at all?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aha, thy faith! what is thy faith?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sleep that waits on coming death—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A blind delirious swoon that follows pain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"True to thy nature!"—well! right well!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But what that nature is thou canst not tell—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It has a thousand voices in thy brain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Danced all the leaflets to and fro?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—Thy feet have trod them long ago!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sprung the glad music up the blue?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—The hawk hath cut the song in two.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the mountains crumble,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the forests fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All thy brethren stumble,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rise no more at all!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the dim woods there is a sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the winds begin to moan;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is not of joy or yet of mirth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the mournful cry of our mother Earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As she calleth back her own.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the rosy air to-night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The living creatures play</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up and down through the rich faint light—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>None so happy as they!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the blast is here, and noises fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like the sound of steps in a ruined hall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An icy touch is upon them all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they sicken and fade away.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">The child awoke with an eye of gladness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a light on his head and a matchless grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And laughed at the passing shades of sadness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That chased the smiles on his mother's face;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And life with its lightsome load of youth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swam like a boat on a shining lake—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Freighted with hopes enough, in sooth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he lived to trample on joy and truth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And change his crown for a murder-stake!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Oh, a ruddy light went through the room,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till the dark ran out to his mother Night!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that little chamber showed through the gloom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a Noah's ark with its nest of light!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Right glad was the maiden there, I wis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the youth that held her hand in his!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh, sweet were the words that went and came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the light and shade of the leaping flame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That glowed on the cheerful faces!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So human the speech, so sunny and kind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That the darkness danced on the wall behind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And even the wail of the winter wind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sang sweet through the window-cases!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">But a mournful wail crept round and round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a voice cried:—"Come!" with a dreary sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the circle wider grew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The light flame sank, and sorrow fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the faces of those that loved so well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Darker and wilder grew the tone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fainter and fainter the faces shone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wild night clasped them, and they were gone—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou art passing too!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Lo, the morning slowly springs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a meek white babe from the womb of night!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One golden planet sits and stings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The shifting gloom with his point of light!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, the sun on its throne of flame!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—Wouldst thou climb and win a crown?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh, many a heart that pants for the same</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Falls to the earth ere he goes down!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy heart is a flower with an open cup—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sit and watch, if it pleaseth thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till the melting twilight fill it up</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a crystal of tender sympathy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, gently will it tremble</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The silent midnight through,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And flocks of stars assemble</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By turns in its depths of dew;—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But look! oh, look again!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After the driving wind and rain!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the day is up and the sun is strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the voices of men are loud and long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the flower hath slunk to its rest again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And love is lost in the strife of men!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Let the morning break with thoughts of love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the evening fall with dreams of bliss—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So vainly panteth the prisoned dove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the depths of her sweet wilderness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So stoops the eagle in his pride</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From his rocky nest ere the bow is bent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So sleeps the deer on the mountain-side</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere the howling pack hath caught the scent!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">The fire climbs high till its work is done;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The stalk falls down when the flower is gone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the stars of heaven when their course is run</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Melt silently away!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was a footfall on the snow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A line of light on the ocean-flow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a billow's dash on the rocks below</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That stand by the wintry bay:—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The snow was gone on the coming night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another wave arose in his might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Uplifted his foaming breast of white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And died like the rest for aye!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Oh, the stars were bright! and thyself in thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yearned for an immortality!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the thoughts that drew from thy busy brain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clasped the worlds like an endless chain—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When a moon arose, and her moving chime</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smote on thy soul, like a word in time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or a breathless wish, or a thought in rime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the truth that looked so gloomy and high</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leapt to thy arms with a joyful cry!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But what wert thou when a soulless Cause</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Opened the book of its barren laws,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thy spirit that was so glad and free</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was caught in the gin of necessity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a howl arose from the strife of things</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vexing each other with scorpion stings?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What wert thou but an orphan child</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thrust from the door when the night was wild?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or a sailor on the toiling main</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Looking blindly up through the wind and rain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the hull of the vessel fell in twain!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Seals are on the book of fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hands may not unbind it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eyes may search for truth till late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But will never find it—!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rising on the brow of night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a portent of dismay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the worlds in wild affright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Track it on its direful way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Resting like a rainbow bar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where the curve and level meet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the children chase it far</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O'er the sands with blistered feet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sadly through the mist of ages</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gazing on this life of fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doubtful shining on its pages,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only seen to disappear!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sit thee by the sounding shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—Winds and waves of human breath!—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Learn a lesson from their roar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swelling, bursting evermore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Live thy life and die thy death!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Die not like the writhing worm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rise and win thy highest stake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Better perish in the storm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than sit rotting on the lake!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Triumph in thy present youth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pulse of fire and heart of glee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leap at once into the truth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If there is a truth for thee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Shapeless thoughts and dull opinions,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slow distinctions and degrees,—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vex not thou thy weary pinions</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With such leaden weights as these—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through this mystic jurisdiction</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reaching out a hand by chance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Resting on a dull conviction</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whetted but by ignorance;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Living ever to behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mournful eyes that watch and weep;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spirit suns that flashed in gold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Failing from the vasty deep;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Starry lights that glowed like Truth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gazing with unnumbered eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Melting from the skies of youth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swallowed up of mysteries;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cords of love that sweetly bound thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faded writing on thy brow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Presences that came around thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hands of faith that fail thee now!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Groping hands will ever find thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the night with loads of chains!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lift thy fetters and unbind thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cast thee on the midnight plains:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shapes of vision all-providing—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Famished cheeks and hungry cries!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sound of crystal waters sliding—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thirsty lips and bloodshot eyes!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Empty forms that send no gleaming</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the mystery of this strife!—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh, in such a life of seeming,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Death were worth an endless life!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Hark the trumpet of the ocean</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where glad lands were wont to be!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many voices of commotion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Break in tumult over thee!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, they climb the frowning ages,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Marching o'er their level lands!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far behind the strife that rages</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Silence sits with clasped hands;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Undivided Purpose, freeing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His own steps from hindrances,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sending out great floods of being,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bathes thy steps in silentness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sit thee down in mirth and laughter—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One there is that waits for thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If there is a true hereafter</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He will lend thee eyes to see.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Like a snowflake gently falling</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On a quiet fountain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or a weary echo calling</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From a distant mountain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drop thy hands in peace,—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fail—falter—cease.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-of-one-who-died-in-spring" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Of One Who Died in Spring</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Loosener of springs, he died by thee!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Softness, not hardness, sent him home;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He loved thee—and thou mad'st him free</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all the place thou comest from!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-an-autumn-song" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">An Autumn Song</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Are the leaves falling round about</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The churchyard on the hill?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is the glow of autumn going out?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is that the winter chill?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet through winter's noise, no doubt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The graves are very still!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Are the woods empty, voiceless, bare?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On sodden leaves do you tread?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is nothing left of all those fair?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is the whole summer fled?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well, so from this unwholesome air</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have gone away these dead!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The seasons pierce me; like a leaf</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I feel the autumn blow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tremble between nature's grief</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the silent death below.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Summer, thou art very brief!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where do these exiles go?</span>
				</p>
				<footer>
					<p>Gilesgate, Durham.</p>
				</footer>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-few-in-joys-sweet-riot" epub:type="poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Triolet</h3>
					<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">Few in Joy's Sweet Riot</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Few in joy's sweet riot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Able are to listen:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou, to make me quiet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quenchest the sweet riot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tak'st away my diet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Puttest me in prison—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quenchest joy's sweet riot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That the heart may listen.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-i-see-thee-not" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">I See Thee Not</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Yes, Master, when thou comest thou shalt find</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A little faith on earth, if I am here!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou know'st how oft I turn to thee my mind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How sad I wait until thy face appear!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Hast thou not ploughed my thorny ground full sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from it gathered many stones and sherds?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Plough, plough and harrow till it needs no more—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then sow thy mustard-seed, and send thy birds.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I love thee, Lord; and if I yield to fears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor trust with triumph that pale doubt defies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Remember, Lord, 'tis nigh two thousand years,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I have never seen thee with mine eyes!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And when I lift them from the wondrous tale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">See, all about me hath so strange a show!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is that thy river running down the vale?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is that thy wind that through the pines doth blow?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Could'st thou right verily appear again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The same who walked the paths of Palestine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And here in England teach thy trusting men</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In church and field and house, with word and sign?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Here are but lilies, sparrows, and the rest!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My hands on some dear proof would light and stay!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But my heart sees John leaning on thy breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sends them forth to do what thou dost say.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-a-broken-prayer" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">A Broken Prayer</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>O Lord, my God, how long</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall my poor heart pant for a boundless joy?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How long, O mighty Spirit, shall I hear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The murmur of Truth's crystal waters slide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the deep caverns of their endless being,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But my lips taste not, and the grosser air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Choke each pure inspiration of thy will?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I am a denseness 'twixt me and the light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>1 cannot round myself; my purest thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere it is thought, hath caught the taint of earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And mocked me with hard thoughts beyond my will.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I would be a wind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose smallest atom is a viewless wing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All busy with the pulsing life that throbs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To do thy bidding; yea, or the meanest thing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That has relation to a changeless truth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could I but be instinct with thee—each thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lightning of a pure intelligence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every act as the loud thunder-clap</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of currents warring for a vacuum.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Lord, clothe me with thy truth as with a robe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Purge me with sorrow; I will bend my head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let the nations of thy waves pass over,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bathing me in thy consecrated strength;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let thy many-voiced and silver winds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pass through my frame with their clear influence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O save me; I am blind; lo, thwarting shapes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wall up the void before, and thrusting out</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lean arms of unshaped expectation, beckon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down to the night of all unholy thoughts.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Oh, when at midnight one of thy strong angels</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stems back the waves of earthly influence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That shape unsteady continents around me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they draw off with the devouring gush</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of exile billows that have found a home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leaving me islanded on unseen points,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hanging 'twixt thee and chaos—I have seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unholy shapes lop off my shining thoughts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they have lent me leathern wings of fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of baffled pride and harrowing distrust;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Godhead, with its crown of many stars,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its pinnacles of flaming holiness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And voice of leaves in the green summer-time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has seemed the shadowed image of a self!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then my soul blackened; and I rose to find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And grasp my doom, and cleave the arching deeps</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of desolation.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O Lord, my soul is a forgotten well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clad round with its own rank luxuriance;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A fountain a kind sunbeam searches for,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sinking the lustre of its arrowy finger</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the long grass its own strange virtue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath blinded up its crystal eye withal:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make me a broad strong river coming down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With shouts from its high hills, whose rocky hearts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Throb forth the joy of their stability</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In watery pulses from their inmost deeps;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I shall be a vein upon thy world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Circling perpetual from the parent deep.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Most mighty One,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Confirm and multiply my thoughts of good;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Help me to wall each sacred treasure round</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the firm battlements of special action.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas, my holy happy thoughts of thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make not perpetual nest within my soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But like strange birds of dazzling colours stoop</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The trailing glories of their sunward speed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For one glad moment, filling my blasted boughs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the sunshine of their wings. Make me a forest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of gladdest life wherein perpetual spring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lifts up her leafy tresses in the wind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, now I see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy trembling starlight sit among my pines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thy young moon slide down my arching boughs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a soft sound of restless eloquence!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I can feel a joy as when thy hosts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of trampling winds, gathering in maddened bands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Roar upward through the blue and flashing day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Round my still depths of uncleft solitude.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Hear me, O Lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the black night draws down upon my soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And voices of temptation darken down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The misty wind, slamming thy starry doors</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With bitter jests:—"Thou fool!" they seem to say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Thou hast no seed of goodness in thee; all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy nature hath been stung right through and through;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy sin hath blasted thee and made thee old;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou hadst a will, but thou hast killed it dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with the fulsome garniture of life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Built out the loathsome corpse; thou art a child</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of night and death, even lower than a worm;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gather the skirts up of thy shadowy self,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with what resolution thou hast left</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fall on the damned spikes of doom!"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Oh, take me like a child,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If thou hast made me for thyself, my God,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lead me up thy hills. I shall not fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So thou wilt make me pure, and beat back sin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the terrors of thine eye: it fears me not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As once it might have feared thine own good image,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But lays bold siege at my heart's doors.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Oh, I have seen a thing of beauty stand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the young moonlight of its upward thoughts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the old earth came round it with its gifts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of gladness, whispering leaves, and odorous plants,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until its large and spiritual eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Burned with intensest love: my God, I could</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have watched it evermore with Argus-eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lest when the noontide of the summer's sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let down the tented sunlight on the plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His flaming beams should scorch my darling flower;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And through the fruitless nights of leaden gloom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of plashing rains, and knotted winds of cold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yea, when thy lightnings ran across the sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the loud stumbling blasts fell from the hills</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the mounds of death, I could have watched</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Guarding such beauty like another life!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, O my God, it changed!—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet methinks I know not if it was not I!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its beauty turned to ghastly loathsomeness!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then a hand spurned me backwards from the clouds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with the gather of a mighty whirlwind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drew in the glittering gifts of life.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>How long, O Lord, how long?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am a man lost in a rocky place!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, all thy echoes smite me with confusion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of varied speech,—the cry of vanished Life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rolled upon nations' sighs—of hearts uplifted</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against despair—the stifled sounds of Woe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sitting perpetual by its grey cold well—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or wasted Toil climbing its endless hills</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With quickening gasps—or the thin winds of Joy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That beat about the voices of the crowd!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Lord, hast thou sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy moons to mock us with perpetual hope?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lighted within our breasts the love of love</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make us ripen for despair, my God?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Oh, dost thou hold each individual soul</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strung clear upon thy flaming rods of purpose?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or does thine inextinguishable will</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stand on the steeps of night with lifted hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Filling the yawning wells of monstrous space</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With mixing thought—drinking up single life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As in a cup? and from the rending folds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of glimmering purpose, do all thy navied stars</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slide through the gloom with mystic melody,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like wishes on a brow? Oh, is my soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hung like a dewdrop in thy grassy ways,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drawn up again into the rack of change</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even through the lustre which created it?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—O mighty one, thou wilt not smite me through</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With scorching wrath, because my spirit stands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bewildered in thy circling mysteries!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Oh lift the burdened gloom that chokes my soul</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With dews of darkness; smite the lean winds of death</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That run with howls around the ruined temples,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blowing the souls of men about like leaves.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Lo, the broad life-lands widen overhead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Star-galaxies arise like drifting snow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And happy life goes whitening down the stream</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of boundless action, whilst my fettered soul</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sits, as a captive in a noisome dungeon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Watches the pulses of his withered heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lave out the sparkling minutes of his life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the idle flags!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Come in the glory of thine excellence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rive the dense gloom with wedges of clear light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let the shimmer of thy chariot wheels</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Burn through the cracks of night! So slowly, Lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To lift myself to thee with hands of toil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Climbing the slippery cliffs of unheard prayer!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lift up a hand among my idle days—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One beckoning finger: I will cast aside</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The clogs of earthly circumstance and run</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up the broad highways where the countless worlds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sit ripening in the summer of thy love.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Send a clear meaning sparkling through the years;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Burst all the prison-doors, and make men's hearts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gush up like fountains with thy melody;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brighten the hollow eyes; fill with life's fruits</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hands that grope and scramble down the wastes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let the ghastly troops of withered ones</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come shining o'er the mountains of thy love.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Lord, thy strange mysteries come thickening down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon my head like snowflakes, shutting out</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The happy upper fields with chilly vapour.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall I content my soul with a weak sense</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of safety? or feed my ravenous hunger with</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sore purged hopes, that are not hopes but fears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clad in white raiment?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The creeds lie in the hollow of men's hearts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like festering pools glassing their own corruption;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The slimy eyes stare up with dull approval,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And answer not when thy bright starry feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Move on the watery floors: oh, shake men's souls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Together like the gathering of all oceans</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rent from their hidden chambers, till the waves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lift up their million voices of high joy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Along the echoing cliffs! come thus, O Lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With nightly gifts of stars, and lay a hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of mighty peace upon the quivering flood.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O wilt thou hear me when I cry to thee?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am a child lost in a mighty forest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The air is thick with voices, and strange hands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reach through the dusk, and pluck me by the skirts.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is a voice which sounds like words from home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, as I stumble on to reach it, seems</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To leap from rock to rock: oh, if it is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Willing obliquity of sense, descend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heal all my wanderings, take me by the hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lead me homeward through the shadows.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let me not by my wilful acts of pride</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Block up the windows of thy truth, and grow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wasted, withered thing, that stumbles on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down to the grave with folded hands of sloth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And leaden confidence.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-come-down" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Come Down</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Still am I haunting</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy door with my prayers;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still they are panting</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Up thy steep stairs!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wouldst thou not rather</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Come down to my heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there, O my Father,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be what thou art?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-a-thanksgiving-for-f-d-maurice" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">A Thanksgiving for F.D. Maurice</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">The veil hath lifted and hath fallen; and him</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who next it stood before us, first so long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We see not; but between the cherubim</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The light burns clearer: come—a thankful song!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Lord, for thy prophet's calm commanding voice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For his majestic innocence and truth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For his unswerving purity of choice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all his tender wrath and plenteous ruth;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">For his obedient, wise, clear-listening care</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hear for us what word The Word would say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all the trembling fervency of prayer</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which he led our souls the prayerful way;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">For all the heavenly glory of his face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That caught the white Transfiguration's shine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cast on us the reflex of thy grace—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all thy men late left, the most divine;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">For all his learning, and the thought of power</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seized thy one Idea everywhere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Brought the eternal down into the hour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And taught the dead thy life to claim and share;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">For his humility, dove-clear of guile;—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sin denouncing, he, like thy great Paul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still claimed in it the greatest share, the while</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our eyes, love-sharpened, saw him best of all!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">For his high victories over sin and fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The captive hope his words of truth set free;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For his abiding memory, holy, dear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Last, for his death and hiding now in thee,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">We praise, we magnify thee, Lord of him:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou hast him still; he ever was thine own;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor shall our tears prevail the path to dim</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That leads where, lowly still, he haunts thy throne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">When thou, O Lord, ascendedst up on high</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Good gifts thou sentest down to cheer thy men:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lo, he ascends!—we follow with the cry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His spirit send thou back in thine again.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-a-mood" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">A Mood</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>My thoughts are like fire-flies, pulsing in moonlight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My heart like a silver cup, filled with red wine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My soul a pale gleaming horizon, whence soon light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will flood the gold earth with a torrent divine.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-the-carpenter" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Carpenter</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>O Lord, at Joseph's humble bench</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy hands did handle saw and plane;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy hammer nails did drive and clench,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Avoiding knot and humouring grain.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That thou didst seem, thou wast indeed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In sport thy tools thou didst not use;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor, helping hind's or fisher's need,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The labourer's hire, too nice, refuse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Lord, might I be but as a saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A plane, a chisel, in thy hand!—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No, Lord! I take it back in awe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such prayer for me is far too grand.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I pray, O Master, let me lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As on thy bench the favoured wood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy saw, thy plane, thy chisel ply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And work me into something good.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>No, no; ambition, holy-high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Urges for more than both to pray:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come in, O gracious Force, I cry—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O workman, share my shed of clay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then I, at bench, or desk, or oar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With knife or needle, voice or pen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As thou in Nazareth of yore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall do the Father's will again.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus fashioning a workman rare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Master, this shall be thy fee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Home to thy father thou shall bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another child made like to thee.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-the-old-garden" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Old Garden</h3>
				</header>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I stood in an ancient garden</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With high red walls around;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Over them grey and green lichens</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In shadowy arabesque wound.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The topmost climbing blossoms</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On fields kine-haunted looked out;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But within were shelter and shadow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With daintiest odours about.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>There were alleys and lurking arbours,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Deep glooms into which to dive.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The lawns were as soft as fleeces,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of daisies I counted but five.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The sun-dial was so aged</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It had gathered a thoughtful grace;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>'Twas the round-about of the shadow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That so had furrowed its face.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The flowers were all of the oldest</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That ever in garden sprung;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Red, and blood-red, and dark purple</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The rose-lamps flaming hung.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Along the borders fringed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With broad thick edges of box</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Stood foxgloves and gorgeous poppies</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And great-eyed hollyhocks.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>There were junipers trimmed into castles,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And ash-trees bowed into tents;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For the garden, though ancient and pensive,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Still wore quaint ornaments.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>It was all so stately fantastic</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Its old wind hardly would stir;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Young Spring, when she merrily entered,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Scarce felt it a place for her.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
					<p>
						<span>I stood in the summer morning</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Under a cavernous yew;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The sun was gently climbing,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And the scents rose after the dew.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>I saw the wise old mansion,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like a cow in the noon-day heat,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Stand in a lake of shadows</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That rippled about its feet.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Its windows were oriel and latticed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lowly and wide and fair;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And its chimneys like clustered pillars</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Stood up in the thin blue air.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>White doves, like the thoughts of a lady,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Haunted it all about;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With a train of green and blue comets</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The peacock went marching stout.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The birds in the trees were singing</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A song as old as the world,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of love and green leaves and sunshine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And winter folded and furled.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>They sang that never was sadness</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But it melted and passed away;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They sang that never was darkness</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But in came the conquering day.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And I knew that a maiden somewhere,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In a low oak-panelled room,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In a nimbus of shining garments,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>An aureole of white-browed bloom,</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Looked out on the garden dreamy,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And knew not it was old;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Looked past the gray and the sombre,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Saw but the green and the gold,</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
					<p>
						<span>I stood in the gathering twilight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In a gently blowing wind;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then the house looked half uneasy,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like one that was left behind.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The roses had lost their redness,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And cold the grass had grown;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At roost were the pigeons and peacock,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The sun-dial seemed a head-stone.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The world by the gathering twilight</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In a gauzy dusk was clad;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Something went into my spirit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And made me a little sad.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Grew and gathered the twilight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It filled my heart and brain;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The sadness grew more than sadness,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It turned to a gentle pain.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Browned and brooded the twilight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pervaded, absorbed the calm,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till it seemed for some human sorrows</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There could not be any balm.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Then I knew that, up a staircase</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which untrod will yet creak and shake,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Deep in a distant chamber</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A ghost was coming awake—</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>In the growing darkness growing,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Growing till her eyes appear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like spots of a deeper twilight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But more transparent clear:</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Thin as hot air up-trembling,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thin as sun-molten crape,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>An ethereal shadow of something</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is taking a certain shape;</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>A shape whose hands hang listless,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Let hang its disordered hair;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A shape whose bosom is heaving</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But draws not in the air.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And I know, what time the moonlight</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On her nest of shadows will sit,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Out on the dim lawn gliding</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That shadowy shadow will flit.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>The moon is dreaming upward</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From a sea of cloud and gleam;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She looks as if she had seen me</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Never but in a dream.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Down the stair I know she is coming,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bare-footed, lifting her train;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It creaks not—she hears it creaking</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where once there was a brain.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Out at yon side-door she's coming,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With a timid glance right and left;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her look is hopeless yet eager,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The look of a heart bereft.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Across the lawn she is flitting,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her thin gown feels the wind;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are her white feet bending the grasses?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her hair is lifted behind!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Shall I stay to look on her nearer?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Would she start and vanish away?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Oh, no, she will never see me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Stand I near as I may!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>It is not this wind she is feeling,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not this cool grass below;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>'Tis the wind and the grass of an evening</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A hundred years ago.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>She sees no roses darkling,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No stately hollyhocks dim;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She is only thinking and dreaming</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The garden, the night, and him,</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The unlit windows behind her,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The timeless dial-stone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The trees, and the moon, and the shadows</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A hundred years agone!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>'Tis a night for a ghostly lover</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To haunt the best-loved spot:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is he come in his dreams to this garden?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I gaze, but I see him not.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I will not look on her nearer,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My heart would be torn in twain;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From my eyes the garden would vanish</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In the falling of their rain.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>I will not look on a sorrow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That darkens into despair,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On the surge of a heart that cannot</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet cannot cease to bear.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>My soul to hers would be calling:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She would hear no word it said!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If I cried aloud in the stillness</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She would never turn her head!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>She is dreaming the sky above her,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She is dreaming the earth below:—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This night she lost her lover</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A hundred years ago.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-a-noonday-melody" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">A Noonday Melody</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Everything goes to its rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hills are asleep in the noon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And life is as still in its nest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As the moon when she looks on a moon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the depth of a calm river's breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As it steals through a midnight in June.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The streams have forgotten the sea</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the dream of their musical sound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sunlight is thick on the tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the shadows lie warm on the ground,—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So still, you may watch them and see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Every breath that awakens around.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The churchyard lies still in the heat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With its handful of mouldering bone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As still as the long stalk of wheat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the shadow that sits by the stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As still as the grass at my feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When I walk in the meadows alone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The waves are asleep on the main,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the ships are asleep on the wave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the thoughts are as still in my brain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As the echo that sleeps in the cave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All rest from their labour and pain—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then why should not I in my grave?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-who-lights-the-fire" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Who Lights the Fire?</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Who lights the fire—that forth so gracefully</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And freely frolicketh the fairy smoke?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some pretty one who never felt the yoke—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glad girl, or maiden more sedate than she.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Pedant it cannot, villain cannot be!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some genius, may-be, his own symbol woke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But puritan, nor rogue in virtue's cloke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor kitchen-maid has done it certainly!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ha, ha! you cannot find the lighter out</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all the blue smoke's pantomimic gesture—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His name or nature, sex or age or vesture!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fire was lit by human care, no doubt—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But now the smoke is Nature's tributary,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dancing 'twixt man and nothing like a fairy.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-who-would-have-thought" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Who Would Have Thought?</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Who would have thought that even an idle song</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were such a holy and celestial thing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That wickedness and envy cannot sing—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That music for no moment lives with wrong?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I know this, for a very grievous throng,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dark thoughts, low wishes, round my bosom cling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, underneath, the hidden holy spring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stagnates because of their enchantment strong.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Blow, breath of heaven, on all this poison blow!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, heart, glow upward to this gracious breath!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Between them, vanish, mist of sin and death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let the life of life within me flow!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Love is the green earth, the celestial air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And music runs like dews and rivers there!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-on-a-christmas-day" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">On a December Day</h3>
				</header>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>This is the sweetness of an April day;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The softness of the spring is on the face</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of the old year. She has no natural grace,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But something comes to her from far away</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Out of the Past, and on her old decay</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The beauty of her childhood you can trace.—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And yet she moveth with a stormy pace,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And goeth quickly.—Stay, old year, oh, stay!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>We do not like new friends, we love the old;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">With young, fierce, hopeful hearts we ill agree;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But thou art patient, stagnant, calm, and cold,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And not like that new year that is to be;—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Life, promise, love, her eyes may fill, fair child!</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">We know the past, and will not be beguiled.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Yet the free heart will not be captive long;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And if she changes often, she is free.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">But if she changes: One has mastery</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who makes the joy the last in every song.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And so to-day I blessed the breezes strong</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That swept the blue; I blessed the breezes free</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That rolled wet leaves like rivers shiningly;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I blessed the purple woods I stood among.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>"And yet the spring is better!" Bitterness</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Came with the words, but did not stay with them.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">"Accomplishment and promise! field and stem</span>
						<br/>
						<span>New green fresh growing in a fragrant dress!</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And we behind with death and memory!"</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">—Nay, prophet-spring! but I will follow thee.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-christmas-day-1850" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Christmas Day, 1850</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Beautiful stories wed with lovely days</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like words and music:—what shall be the tale</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of love and nobleness that might avail</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To express in action what this sweetness says—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The sweetness of a day of airs and rays</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That are strange glories on the winter pale?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Alas, O beauty, all my fancies fail!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I cannot tell a story in thy praise!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thou hast, thou hast one—set, and sure to chime</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With thee, as with the days of "winter wild;"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Joy like Sorrow loves his blessed feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who shone from Heaven on Earth this Christmas-time</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Brother and a Saviour, Mary's child!—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so, fair day, thou <i>hast</i> thy story sweet.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-to-a-february-primrose" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">To a February Primrose</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I know not what among the grass thou art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy nature, nor thy substance, fairest flower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor what to other eyes thou hast of power</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To send thine image through them to the heart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when I push the frosty leaves apart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And see thee hiding in thy wintry bower</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou growest up within me from that hour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And through the snow I with the spring depart.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I have no words. But fragrant is the breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pale beauty, of thy second life within.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is a wind that cometh for thy death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But thou a life immortal dost begin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where in one soul, which is thy heaven, shall dwell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy spirit, beautiful Unspeakable!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-in-february" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">In February</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now in the dark of February rains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Poor lovers of the sunshine, spring is born,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The earthy fields are full of hidden corn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And March's violets bud along the lanes;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therefore with joy believe in what remains.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thou who dost not feel them, do not scorn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our early songs for winter overworn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And faith in God's handwriting on the plains.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Hope" writes he, "Love" in the first violet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Joy," even from Heaven, in songs and winds and trees;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And having caught the happy words in these</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While Nature labours with the letters yet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Spring cannot cheat us, though <i>her</i> hopes be broken,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor leave us, for we know what God hath spoken.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-the-true" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The True</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I envy the tree-tops that shake so high</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In winds that fill them full of heavenly airs;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I envy every little cloud that shares</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With unseen angels evening in the sky;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I envy most the youngest stars that lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sky-nested, and the loving heaven that bears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And night that makes strong worlds of them unawares;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all God's other beautiful and nigh!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nay, nay, I envy not! And these are dreams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fancies and images of real heaven!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My longings, all my longing prayers are given</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For that which is, and not for that which seems.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Draw me, O Lord, to thy true heaven above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Heaven of thy Thought, thy Rest, thy Love.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-the-dwellers-therein" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Dwellers Therein</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Down a warm alley, early in the year,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Among the woods, with all the sunshine in</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the winds outside it, I begin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To think that something gracious will appear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If anything of grace inhabit here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or there be friendship in the woods to win.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might one but find companions more akin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To trees and grass and happy daylight clear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in this wood spend one long hour at home!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fairies do not love so bright a place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And angels to the forest never come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But I have dreamed of some harmonious race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The kindred of the shapes that haunt the shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Music's flow and flow for evermore.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-autumns-gold" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Autumn's Gold</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Along the tops of all the yellow trees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The golden-yellow trees, the sunshine lies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And where the leaves are gone, long rays surprise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lone depths of thicket with their brightnesses;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And through the woods, all waste of many a breeze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cometh more joy of light for Poet's eyes—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Green fields lying yellow underneath the skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shining houses and blue distances.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By the roadside, like rocks of golden ore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That make the western river-beds so bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The briar and the furze are all alight!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps the year will be so fair no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But now the fallen, falling leaves are gay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And autumn old has shone into a Day!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-punishment" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Punishment</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Mourner, that dost deserve thy mournfulness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Call thyself punished, call the earth thy hell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Say, "God is angry, and I earned it well—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I would not have him smile on wickedness:"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Say this, and straightway all thy grief grows less:—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"God rules at least, I find as prophets tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And proves it in this prison!"—then thy cell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smiles with an unsuspected loveliness.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>—"A prison—and yet from door and window-bar</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I catch a thousand breaths of his sweet air!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even to me his days and nights are fair!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He shows me many a flower and many a star!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And though I mourn and he is very far,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He does not kill the hope that reaches there!"</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-shew-us-the-father" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Shew Us the Father</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>"Shew us the Father." Chiming stars of space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lives that fit the worlds, and means and powers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Thought that holds them up reveal to ours—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Wisdom we have been made wise to trace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, looking out from sweetest Nature's face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From sunsets, moonlights, rivers, hills, and flowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Infinite love and beauty, all the hours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Woo men that love them with divinest grace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the depths of all the answering soul</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">High Justice speaks, and calls the world her own;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet we long, and yet we have not known</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The very Father's face who means the whole!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shew us the Father! Nature, conscience, love</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Revealed in beauty, is there One above?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-the-pinafore" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Pinafore</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>When peevish flaws his soul have stirred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To fretful tears for crossed desires,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Obedient to his mother's word</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My child to banishment retires.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As disappears the moon, when wind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Heaps miles of mist her visage o'er,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So vanisheth his face behind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cloud of his white pinafore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I cannot then come near my child—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A gulf between of gainful loss;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He to the infinite exiled—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I waiting, for I cannot cross.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ah then, what wonder, passing show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Isis-veil behind it brings—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like that self-coffined creatures know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Remembering legs, foreseeing wings!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Mysterious moment! When or how</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is the bewildering change begun?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hid in far deeps the awful <i>now</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When turns his being to the sun!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A light goes up behind his eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A still small voice behind his ears;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A listing wind about him sighs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lo the inner landscape clears!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Hid by that screen, a wondrous shine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is gathering for a sweet surprise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As Moses grew, in dark divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Too radiant for his people's eyes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For when the garment sinks again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Outbeams a brow of heavenly wile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clear as a morning after rain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sunny with a perfect smile.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Oh, would that I the secret knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of hiding from my evil part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And turning to the lovely true</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The open windows of my heart!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Lord, in thy skirt, love's tender gaol,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hide thou my selfish heart's disgrace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fill me with light, and then unveil</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To friend and foe a friendly face.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-the-prism" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Prism</h3>
				</header>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A pool of broken sunbeams lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the passage-floor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Radiant and rich, profound and gay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As ever diamond bore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Small, flitting hands a handkerchief</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Spread like a cunning trap:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prone lay the gorgeous jewel-sheaf</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the glory-gleaner's lap!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Deftly she folded up the prize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With lovely avarice;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like one whom <i>having</i> had made wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She bore it off in bliss.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But ah, when for her prisoned gems</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She peeped, to prove them there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No glories broken from their stems</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lay in the kerchief bare!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For still, outside the nursery door,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bright persistency,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A molten diadem on the floor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lay burning wondrously.</span>
				</p>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>How oft have I laid fold from fold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And peered into my mind—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see of all the purple and gold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not one gleam left behind!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The best of gifts will not be stored:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The manna of yesterday</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has filled no sacred miser-hoard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To keep new need away.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thy grace, O Lord, it is thyself;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy presence is thy light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I cannot lay it on my shelf,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or take it from thy sight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For daily bread we daily pray—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The want still breeds the cry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so we meet, day after day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou, Father in heaven, and I.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Is my house dreary, wall and floor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will not the darkness flit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I go outside my shadowy door</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in thy rainbow sit.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-sleep" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Sleep</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Oh! is it Death that comes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To have a foretaste of the whole?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To-night the planets and the stars</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will glimmer through my window-bars</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But will not shine upon my soul!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For I shall lie as dead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though yet I am above the ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All passionless, with scarce a breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With hands of rest and eyes of death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shall be carried swiftly round.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Or if my life should break</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The idle night with doubtful gleams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through mossy arches will I go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through arches ruinous and low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And chase the true and false in dreams.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Why should I fall asleep?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I am still upon my bed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The moon will shine, the winds will rise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all around and through the skies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The light clouds travel o'er my head!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O busy, busy things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye mock me with your ceaseless life!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all the hidden springs will flow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the blades of grass will grow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I have neither peace nor strife.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And all the long night through</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The restless streams will hurry by;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And round the lands, with endless roar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The white waves fall upon the shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bit by bit devour the dry.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Even thus, but silently,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eternity, thy tide shall flow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And side by side with every star</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy long-drawn swell shall bear me far,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An idle boat with none to row.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>My senses fail with sleep;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My heart beats thick; the night is noon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And faintly through its misty folds</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I hear a drowsy clock that holds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its converse with the waning moon.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Oh, solemn mystery</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I should be so closely bound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With neither terror nor constraint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without a murmur of complaint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lose myself upon such ground!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-sharing" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Sharing</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>On the far horizon there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heaps of cloudy darkness rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though the wind is in the air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is stupor east and west.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For the sky no change is making,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scarce we know it from the plain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Droop its eyelids never waking,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blinded by the misty rain;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Save on high one little spot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Round the baffled moon a space</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where the tumult ceaseth not:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wildly goes the midnight race!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And a joy doth rise in me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upward gazing on the sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I think that others see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In yon clouds a like delight;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>How perchance an aged man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Struggling with the wind and rain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the moonlight cold and wan</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feels his heart grow young again;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As the cloudy rack goes by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How the life-blood mantles up</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till the fountain deep and dry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yields once more a sparkling cup.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Or upon the gazing child</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cometh down a thought of glory</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which will keep him undefiled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till his head is old and hoary.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For it may be he hath woke</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hath raised his fair young form;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strangely on his eyes have broke</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the splendours of the storm;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And his young soul forth doth leap</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the storm-clouds in the moon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his heart the light will keep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though the vision passeth soon.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus a joy hath often laughed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On my soul from other skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bearing on its wings a draught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the wells of Paradise,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For that not to me alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Comes a splendour out of fear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where the light of heaven hath shone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is glory far and near.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-in-bonds" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">In Bonds</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Of the poor bird that cannot fly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kindly you think and mournfully;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For prisoners and for exiles all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You let the tears of pity fall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And very true the grief should be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That mourns the bondage of the free.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The soul—<i>she</i> has a fatherland;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Binds <i>her</i> not many a tyrant's hand?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the winged spirit has a home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But can she always homeward come?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poor souls, with all their wounds and foes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will you not also pity those?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-hunger" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Hunger</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Father, I cry to thee for bread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With hungred longing, eager prayer;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou hear'st, and givest me instead</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More hunger and a half-despair.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O Lord, how long? My days decline,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My youth is lapped in memories old;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I need not bread alone, but wine—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">See, cup and hand to thee I hold!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And yet thou givest: thanks, O Lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That still my heart with hunger faints!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The day will come when at thy board</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I sit, forgetting all my plaints.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>If rain must come and winds must blow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I pore long o'er dim-seen chart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, Lord, let not the hunger go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And keep the faintness at my heart.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-godly-ballants" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Godly Ballants</h3>
				</header>
				<section id="a-threefold-cord-godly-ballants-1">
					<hgroup>
						<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h4>
						<p epub:type="title">This Side An' That</p>
					</hgroup>
					<p>
						<span>The rich man sat in his father's seat—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Purple an' linen, an' a'thing fine!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The puir man lay at his yett i' the street—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Sairs an' tatters, an' weary pine!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>To the rich man's table ilk dainty comes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Mony a morsel gaed frae't, or fell;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The puir man fain wud hae dined on the crumbs,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">But whether he got them I canna tell.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Servants prood, saft-fittit, an' stoot,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Stan by the rich man's curtained doors;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Maisterless dogs 'at rin aboot</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Cam to the puir man an' lickit his sores.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The rich man deeit, an' they buried him gran',</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">In linen fine his body they wrap;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But the angels tuik up the beggar man,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">An' layit him doun in Abraham's lap.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The guid upo' this side, the ill upo' that—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Sic was the rich man's waesome fa'!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But his brithers they eat, an' they drink, an' they chat,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">An' carena a strae for their Father's ha'!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The trowth's the trowth, think what ye will;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">An' some they kenna what they wad be at;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But the beggar man thoucht he did no that ill,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Wi' the dogs o' this side, the angels o' that!</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-threefold-cord-godly-ballants-2">
					<hgroup>
						<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h4>
						<p epub:type="title">The Twa Baubees</p>
					</hgroup>
					<p>
						<span>Stately, lang-robit, an' steppin at ease,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The rich men gaed up the temple ha';</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hasty, an' grippin her twa baubees,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The widow cam efter, booit an' sma'.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Their goud rang lood as it fell, an' lay</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Yallow an' glintin, bonnie an' braw;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But the fowk roun the Maister h'ard him say</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The puir body's baubees was mair nor it a'.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-threefold-cord-godly-ballants-3">
					<hgroup>
						<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h4>
						<p epub:type="title">Wha's My Neibour?</p>
					</hgroup>
					<p>
						<span>Doon frae Jerus'lem a traveller took</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The laigh road to Jericho;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It had an ill name an' mony a crook,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">It was lang an' unco how.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Oot cam the robbers, an' fell o' the man,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">An' knockit him o' the heid,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Took a' whauron they couth lay their han',</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">An' left him nakit for deid.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>By cam a minister o' the kirk:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">"A sair mishanter!" he cried;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>"Wha kens whaur the villains may lirk!</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">I s' haud to the ither side!"</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>By cam an elder o' the kirk;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Like a young horse he shied:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>"Fie! here's a bonnie mornin's wark!"</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">An' he spangt to the ither side.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>By cam ane gaed to the wrang kirk;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Douce he trottit alang.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>"Puir body!" he cried, an' wi' a yerk</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Aff o' his cuddy he sprang.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>He ran to the body, an' turnt it ower:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">"There's life i' the man!" he cried.</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>He</i> wasna ane to stan an' glower,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Nor hand to the ither side!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>He doctort his oons, an' heised him then</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To the back o' the beastie douce;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>An' he heild him on till, twa weary men,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">They wan to the half-way hoose.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>He ten'd him a' nicht, an' o' the morn did say,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">"Lan'lord, latna him lack;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Here's auchteen pence!—an' ony mair ootlay</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">I'll sattle 't as I come back."</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Sae tak til ye, neibours; read aricht the word;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">It's a portion o' God's ain spell!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>"Wha is my neibour?" speirna the Lord,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">But, "Am I a neibour?" yersel.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-threefold-cord-godly-ballants-4">
					<hgroup>
						<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h4>
						<p epub:type="title">Him Wi' the Bag</p>
					</hgroup>
					<p>
						<span>Ance was a woman wha's hert was gret;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Her love was sae dumb it was 'maist a grief;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She brak the box—it's tellt o' her yet—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The bonny box for her hert's relief.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Ane was there wha's tale's but brief,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Yet was ower lang, the gait he cawed;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He luikit a man, and was but a thief,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Michty the gear to grip and hand.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>"What guid," he cried, "sic a boxfu to blaud?</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Wilfu waste I couth never beir!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It micht hae been sellt for ten poun, I wad—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Sellt for ten poun, and gien to the puir!"</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Savin he was, but for love o' the gear;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Carefu he was, but a' for himsel;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He carried the bag to his hert sae near</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">What fell i' the ane i' the ither fell.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And the strings o' his hert hingit doun to hell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">They war pu'd sae ticht aboot the mou;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And hence it comes that I hae to tell</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The warst ill tale that ever was true.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The hert that's greedy maun mischief brew,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And the deils pu'd the strings doon yon'er in hell;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And he sauld, or the agein mune was new,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">For thirty shillins the Maister himsel!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Gear i' the hert it's a canker fell:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Brithers, latna the siller ben!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Troth, gien ye du, I warn ye ye'll sell</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The verra Maister or ever ye ken!</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-threefold-cord-godly-ballants-5">
					<hgroup>
						<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h4>
						<p epub:type="title">The Coorse Cratur</p>
					</hgroup>
					<p>
						<span>The Lord gaed wi' a crood o' men</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Throu Jericho the bonny;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>'Twas ill the Son o' Man to ken</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Mang sons o' men sae mony:</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The wee bit son o' man Zacchay</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To see the Maister seekit;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He speilt a fig-tree, bauld an' shy,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">An' sae his shortness ekit.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>But as he thoucht to see his back,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Roun turnt the haill face til 'im,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Up luikit straucht, an' til 'im spak—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">His hert gaed like to kill 'im.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>"Come doun, Zacchay; bestir yersel;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">This nicht I want a lodgin."</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like a ripe aipple 'maist he fell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Nor needit ony nudgin.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>But up amang the unco guid</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">There rase a murmurin won'er:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>"This is a deemis want o' heed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The man's a special sinner!"</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Up spak Zacchay, his hert ableeze:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">"Half mine, the puir, Lord, hae it;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Gien oucht I've taen by ony lees,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Fourfauld again I pay it!"</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Then Jesus said, "This is a man!</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">His hoose I'm here to save it;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He's are o' Abraham's ain clan,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">An' siclike has behavit!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>I cam the lost to seek an' win."—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Zacchay was are he wantit:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To ony man that left his sin</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">His grace he never scantit.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-to-the-clouds" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">To the Clouds</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Through the unchanging heaven, as ye have sped,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Speed onward still, a strange wild company,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fleet children of the waters! Glorious ye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether the sun lift up his shining head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High throned at noontide and established</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the shifting pillars, or we see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sable ghosts of air sleep mournfully</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against the sunlight, passionless and dead!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Take thus a glory, oh thou higher Sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From all the cloudy labour of man's hand—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether the quickening nations rise and run,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or in the market-place we idly stand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Casting huge shadows over these thy plains—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even thence, O God, draw thy rich gifts of rains.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-new-years-eve-a-waking-dream" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">New Year's Eve: A Waking Dream</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I have not any fearful tale to tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of fabled giant or of dragon-claw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or bloody deed to pilfer and to sell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To those who feed, with such, a gaping maw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But what in yonder hamlet there befell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or rather what in it my fancy saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will declare, albeit it may seem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too simple and too common for a dream.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Two brothers were they, and they sat alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without a word, beside the winter's glow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For it was many years since they had known</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The love that bindeth brothers, till the snow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of age had frozen it, and it had grown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An icy-withered stream that would not flow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so they sat with warmth about their feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ice about their hearts that would not beat.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And yet it was a night for quiet hope:—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A night the very last of all the year</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To many a youthful heart did seem to ope</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An eye within the future, round and clear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And age itself, that travels down the slope,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sat glad and waiting as the hour drew near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dreamy hour that hath the heaviest chime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Jerking our souls into the coming time.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But they!—alas for age when it is old!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The silly calendar they did not heed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas for age when in its bosom cold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is not warmth to nurse a bladed weed!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They thought not of the morrow, but did hold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A quiet sitting as their hearts did feed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inwardly on themselves, as still and mute</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if they were a-cold from head to foot.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O solemn kindly night, she looketh still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all her moon upon us now and then!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And though she dwelleth most in craggy hill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She hath an eye unto the hearts of men!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So past a corner of the window-sill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She thrust a long bright finger just as ten</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had struck, and on the dial-plate it came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Healing each hour's raw edge with tender flame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There is a something in the winds of heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That stirreth purposely and maketh men;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And unto every little wind is given</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thing to do ere it is still again;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So when the little clock had struck eleven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The edging moon had drawn her silver pen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Across a mirror, making them aware</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of something ghostlier than their own grey hair.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therefore they drew aside the window-blind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And looked upon the sleeping town below,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the little church which sat behind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As keeping watch upon the scanty row</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of steady tombstones—some of which inclined</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And others upright, in the moon did show</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like to a village down below the waves—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was so still and cool among the graves.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But not a word from either mouth did fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Except it were some very plain remark.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! why should such as they be glad at all?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For years they had not listened to the lark!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The child was dead in them!—yet did there crawl</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wish about their hearts; and as the bark</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of distant sheep-dog came, they were aware</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of a strange longing for the open air.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ah! many an earthy-weaving year had spun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A web of heavy cloud about their brain!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many a sun and moon had come and gone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since they walked arm in arm, these brothers twain!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now with timed pace their feet did stun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The village echoes into quiet pain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The street appeared very short and white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they like ghosts unquiet for the light.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Right through the churchyard," one of them did say</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—I knew not which was elder of the two—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Right through the churchyard is our better way."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Ay," said the other, "past the scrubby yew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have not seen her grave for many a day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And it is in me that with moonlight too</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It might be pleasant thinking of old faces,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet I seldom go into such places."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Strange, strange indeed to me the moonlight wan</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sitting about a solitary stone!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stranger than many tales it is to scan</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The earthy fragment of a human bone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But stranger still to see a grey old man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Apart from all his fellows, and alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the pale night and all its giant quiet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore that stone was strange and those two by it.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It was their mother's grave, and here were hid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The priceless pulses of a mother's soul.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full sixty years it was since she had slid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the other world through that deep hole.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But as they stood it seemed the coffin-lid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grew deaf with sudden hammers!—'twas the mole</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Niddering about its roots.—Be still, old men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be very still and ye will hear again.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ay, ye will hear it! Ye may go away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But it will stay with you till ye are dead!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is but earthy mould and quiet clay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But it hath power to turn the oldest head.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their eyes met in the moon, and they did say</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More than a hundred tongues had ever said.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So they passed onwards through the rapping wicket</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the centre of a firry thicket.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It was a solemn meeting of Earth's life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An inquest held upon the death of things;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the naked north full thick and rife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The snow-clouds too were meeting as on wings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shorn round the edges by the frost's keen knife;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the trees seemed to gather into rings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Waiting to be made blind, as they did quail</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among their own wan shadows thin and pale.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Many strange noises are there among trees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And most within the quiet moony light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore those aged men are on their knees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if they listened somewhat:—Ye are right—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upwards it bubbles like the hum of bees!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although ye never heard it till to-night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mighty mother calleth ever so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To all her pale-eyed children from below.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ay, ye have walked upon her paven ways,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And heard her voices in the market-place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ye have never listened what she says</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the snow-moon is pressing on her face!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One night like this is more than many days</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To him who hears the music and the bass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of deep immortal lullabies which calm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His troubled soul as with a hushing psalm.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I know not whether there is power in sleep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To dim the eyelids of the shining moon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But so it seemed then, for still more deep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She grew into a heavy cloud, which, soon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hiding her outmost edges, seemed to keep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A pressure on her; so there came a swoon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the shadows, which still lay together</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in their slumber knew not one another.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But while the midnight groped for the chime</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As she were heavy with excess of dreams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She from the cloud's thick web a second time</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made many shadows, though with minished beams;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as she looked eastward through the rime</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of a thin vapour got of frosty steams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There fell a little snow upon the crown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of a near hillock very bald and brown.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And on its top they found a little spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A very helpful little spring indeed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which evermore unwound a tiny string</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of earnest water with continual speed—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so the brothers stood and heard it sing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all was snowy-still, and not a seed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had struck, and nothing came but noises light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the continual whitening of the night.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There is a kindness in the falling snow—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is a grey head to the spring time mild;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So as the creamy vapour bowed low</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crowning the earth with honour undefiled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within each withered man arose a glow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if he fain would turn into a child:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was a gladness somewhere in the ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which in his bosom nowhere could be found!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Not through the purple summer or the blush</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of red voluptuous roses did it come</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That silent speaking voice, but through the slush</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And snowy quiet of the winter numb!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was a barren mound that heard the gush</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of living water from two fountains dumb—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two rocky human hearts which long had striven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make a pleasant noise beneath high heaven!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now from the village came the onward shout</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of lightsome voices and of merry cheer;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was a youthful group that wandered out</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To do obeisance to the glad new year;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as they passed they sang with voices stout</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A song which I was very fain to hear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But as they darkened on, away it died,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the two men walked homewards side by side.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-mourn-not-my-friends-that-we-are-growing-old" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Death</h3>
					<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">Mourn Not, My Friends, That We Are Growing Old</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Mourn not, my friends, that we are growing old:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A fresher birth brings every new year in.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Years are Christ's napkins to wipe off the sin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>See now, I'll be to you an angel bold!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My plumes are ruffled, and they shake with cold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet with a trumpet-blast I will begin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—Ah, no; your listening ears not thus I win!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet hear, sweet sisters; brothers, be consoled:—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behind me comes a shining one indeed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Christ's friend, who from life's cross did take him down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And set upon his day night's starry crown!</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Death</i>, say'st thou? Nay—thine be no caitiff creed!—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A woman-angel! see—in long white gown!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mother of our youth!—she maketh speed.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-from-north-wales-to-the-mother" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">From North Wales: To the Mother</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>When the summer gave us a longer day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the leaves were thickest, I went away:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like an isle, through dark clouds, of the infinite blue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was that summer-ramble from London and you.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It was but one burst into life and air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One backward glance on the skirts of care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A height on the hills with the smoke below—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the joy that came quickly was quick to go.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But I know and I cannot forget so soon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How the Earth is shone on by Sun and Moon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How the clouds hide the mountains, and how they move</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the morning sunshine lies warm above.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I know how the waters fall and run</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the rocks and the heather, away from the sun;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How they hang like garlands on all hill-sides,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And are the land's music, those crystal tides.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I know how they gather in valleys fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meet valleys those beautiful waves to bear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How they dance through the rocks, how they rest in the pool,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How they darken, how sparkle, and how they are cool.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I know how the rocks from their kisses climb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To keep the storms off with a front sublime;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And how on their platforms and sloping walls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The shadow of oak-tree and fir-tree falls.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I know how the valleys are bright from far,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rocks, meadows, and waters, the wood and the scaur;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And how the roadside and the nearest hill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The foxglove and heather and harebell fill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I know—but the joy that was quick to go</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gave more knowledge to me than words can shew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And <i>you</i> know the story, and how they fare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who love the green earth and the heavenly air.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-mirls" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Mirls</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The stars are steady abune;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I' the water they flichter and flee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, steady aye, luikin doon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They ken theirsels i' the sea.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A' licht, and clear, and free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">God, thou shinest abune;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet luik, and see thysel in me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Aye on me luikin doon.</span>
				</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>
					<span>Throu the heather an' how gaed the creepin thing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But abune was the waff o' an angel's wing.</span>
				</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>
					<span>Hither an' thither, here an' awa,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the dub ye maunna fa';</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oot o' the dub wad ye come wi' speed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye maun lift yer han's abune yer heid.</span>
				</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>
					<span>Whaur's nor sun nor mune,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Laigh things come abune.</span>
				</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>
					<span>My thouchts are like worms in a starless gloamin</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My hert's like a sponge that's fillit wi' gall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My soul's like a bodiless ghaist sent a roamin</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I' the haar an' the mirk till the trumpet call.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Lord, turn ilk worm til a butterflee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wring oot my hert, an' fill 't frae thy ain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My soul syne in patience its weird will dree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An' luik for the mornin throu the rain.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-come-to-me" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Come to Me</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Come to me, come to me, O my God;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Come to me everywhere!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let the trees mean thee, and the grassy sod,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the water and the air!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For thou art so far that I often doubt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As on every side I stare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Searching within, and looking without,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If thou canst be anywhere.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>How did men find thee in days of old?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How did they grow so sure?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They fought in thy name, they were glad and bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They suffered, and kept themselves pure!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But now they say—neither above the sphere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor down in the heart of man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But solely in fancy, ambition, and fear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The thought of thee began.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>If only that perfect tale were true</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which ages have not made old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which of endless many makes one anew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And simplicity manifold!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But <i>he</i> taught that they who did his word</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The truth of it sure would know:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will try to do it: if he be lord</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Again the old faith will glow;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Again the old spirit-wind will blow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he promised to their prayer;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And obeying the Son, I too shall know</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His father everywhere!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-a-fear" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">A Fear</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>O Mother Earth, I have a fear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which I would tell to thee—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Softly and gently in thine ear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the moon and we are three.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thy grass and flowers are beautiful;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among thy trees I hide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And underneath the moonlight cool</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy sea looks broad and wide;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But this I fear—lest thou shouldst grow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To me so small and strange,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So distant I should never know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On thee a shade of change,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Although great earthquakes should uplift</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deep mountains from their base,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thy continual motion shift</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lands upon thy face;—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The grass, the flowers, the dews that lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon them as before—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Driven upwards evermore, lest I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should love these things no more.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Even now thou dimly hast a place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In deep star galaxies!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I, driven ever on through space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have lost thee in the skies!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-the-lost-house" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Lost House</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Out of thy door I run to do the thing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That calls upon me. Straight the wind of words</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whoops from mine ears the sounds of them that sing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About their work, "My God, my father-king!"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I turn in haste to see thy blessed door,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, lo, a cloud of flies and bats and birds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stalking vapours, and vague monster-herds</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Have risen and lighted, rushed and swollen between!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ah me! the house of peace is there no more.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was it a dream then?—Walls, fireside, and floor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sweet obedience, loving, calm, and free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Are vanished—gone as they had never been!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">I labour groaning. Comes a sudden sheen!—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I am kneeling at my father's knee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sighing with joy, and hoping utterly.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-the-talk-of-the-echoes" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Talk of the Echoes</h3>
					<p epub:type="subtitle">A Fragment.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>When the cock crows loud from the glen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the moor-cock chirrs from the heather,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What hear ye and see ye then,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye children of air and ether?</span>
				</p>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">1st Echo.</td>
					<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>A thunder as of waves at the rising of the moon,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And a darkness on the graves though the day is at its noon.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">2nd Echo.</td>
					<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>A springing as of grass though the air is damp and chill,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And a glimmer from the river that winds about the hill.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">1st Echo.</td>
					<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>A lapse of crags that leant from the mountain's earthen sheath,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And a shock of ruin sent on the river underneath.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">2nd Echo.</td>
					<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>A sound as of a building that groweth fair and good,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And a piping of the thrushes from the hollow of the wood.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">1st Echo.</td>
					<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>A wailing as of lambs that have wandered from the flock,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And a bleating of their dams that was answered from the rock.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">2nd Echo.</td>
					<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>A breathing as of cattle in the shadow where they dream,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And a sound of children playing with the pebbles in the stream.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">1st Echo.</td>
					<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>A driving as of clouds in the kingdom of the air,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And a tumult as of crowds that mingle everywhere.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">2nd Echo.</td>
					<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>A waving of the grass, and a passing o'er the lakes,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And a shred of tempest-cloud in the glory when it breaks.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-the-goal" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Goal</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>In God alone, the perfect end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wilt thou find thyself or friend.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-the-healer" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Healer</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>They come to thee, the halt, the maimed, the blind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The devil-torn, the sick, the sore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy heart their well of life they find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thine ear their open door.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ah, who can tell the joy in Palestine—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What smiles and tears of rescued throngs!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their lees of life were turned to wine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their prayers to shouts and songs!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The story dear our wise men fable call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Give paltry facts the mighty range;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To me it seems just what should fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And nothing very strange.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But were I deaf and lame and blind and sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I scarce would care for cure to ask;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another prayer should haunt thy door—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Set thee a harder task.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>If thou art Christ, see here this heart of mine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Torn, empty, moaning, and unblest!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had ever heart more need of thine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If thine indeed hath rest?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thy word, thy hand right soon did scare the bane</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in their bodies death did breed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If thou canst cure my deeper pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then art thou lord indeed.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-oh-that-a-wind" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Oh That a Wind</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Oh that a wind would call</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the depths of the leafless wood!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh that a voice would fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On the ear of my solitude!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Far away is the sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With its sound and its spirit tone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over it white clouds flee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But I am alone, alone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Straight and steady and tall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The trees stand on their feet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fast by the old stone wall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The moss grows green and sweet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But my heart is full of fears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the sun shines far away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they look in my face through tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the light of a dying day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>My heart was glad last night</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As I pressed it with my palm;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its throb was airy and light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As it sang some spirit psalm;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But it died away in my breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As I wandered forth to-day,—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As a bird sat dead on its nest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While others sang on the spray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O weary heart of mine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is there ever a Truth for thee?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will ever a sun outshine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the sun that shines on me?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Away, away through the air</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The clouds and the leaves are blown;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And my heart hath need of prayer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For it sitteth alone, alone.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-a-vision-of-st-eligius" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">A Vision of St. Eligius</h3>
				</header>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I see thy house, but I am blown about,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">A wind-mocked kite, between the earth and sky,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All out of doors—alas! of thy doors out,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And drenched in dews no summer suns can dry.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>For every blast is passion of my own;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The dews cold sweats of selfish agony;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dank vapour steams from memories lying prone;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And all my soul is but a stifled cry.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Lord, thou dost hold my string, else were I driven</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Down to some gulf where I were tossed no more,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No turmoil telling I was not in heaven,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">No billows raving on a blessed shore.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Thou standest on thy door-sill, calm as day,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And all my throbs and pangs are pulls from thee;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hold fast the string, lest I should break away</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And outer dark and silence swallow me.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>No longer fly thy kite, Lord; draw me home.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Thou pull'st the string through all the distance bleak;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lord, I am nearing thee; O Lord, I come;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Thy pulls grow stronger and the wind grows weak.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>In thy remodelling hands thou tak'st thy kite;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">A moment to thy bosom hold'st me fast.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou flingest me abroad:—lo, in thy might</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">A strong-winged bird I soar on every blast!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-of-the-son-of-man" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Of the Son of Man</h3>
				</header>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">I honour Nature, holding it unjust</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To look with jealousy on her designs;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With every passing year more fast she twines</span>
						<br/>
						<span>About my heart; with her mysterious dust</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Claim I a fellowship not less august</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Although she works before me and combines</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her changing forms, wherever the sun shines</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Spreading a leafy volume on the crust</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of the old world; and man himself likewise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is of her making: wherefore then divorce</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What God hath joined thus, and rend by force</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Spirit away from substance, bursting ties</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By which in one great bond of unity</span>
						<br/>
						<span>God hath together bound all things that be?</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">And in these lines my purpose is to show</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That He who left the Father, though he came</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not with art-splendour or the earthly flame</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of genius, yet in that he did bestow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His own true loving heart, did cause to grow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unseen and buried deep, whate'er we name</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The best in human art, without the shame</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of idle sitting in most real woe;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And that whate'er of Beautiful and Grand</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Earth contains, by him was not despised,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But rather was so deeply realized</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In word and deed, though not with artist hand,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That it was either hid or all disguised</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From those who were not wise to understand.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Art is the bond of weakness, and we find</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Therein acknowledgment of failing power:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A man would worship, gazing on a flower—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Onward he passeth, lo his eyes are blind!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The unenlivened form he left behind</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Grew up within him only for an hour!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And he will grapple with Nature till the dower</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of strength shall be retreasured in his mind.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And each form-record is a high protest</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of treason done unto the soul of man,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which, striving upwards, ever is oppress'd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By the old bondage, underneath whose ban</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He, failing in his struggle for the best,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Must live in pain upon what food he can.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Moreover, were there perfect harmony</span>
						<br/>
						<span>'Twixt soul and Nature, we should never waste</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The precious hours in gazing, but should haste</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To assimilate her offerings, and we</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From high life-elements, as doth the tree,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Should grow to higher; so what we call Taste</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is a slow living as of roots encased</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In the grim chinks of some sterility</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Both cramping and withholding. Art is Truth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But Truth dammed up and frozen, gagged and bound</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As is a streamlet icy and uncouth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which pebbles hath and channel but no sound:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Give it again its summer heart of youth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And it will be a life upon the ground.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>And Love had not been prisoned in cold stone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor Beauty smeared on the dead canvas so,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had not their worshipper been forced to go</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Questful and restless through the world alone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Searching but finding not, till on him shone</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Back from his own deep heart a chilly glow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As of a frost-nipped sunbeam, or of snow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Under a storm-dodged crescent which hath grown</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wasted to mockery; and beneath such gleam</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His wan conceits have found an utterance,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which, had they found a true and sunny beam,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had ripened into real touch and glance—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nay more, to real deed, the Truth of all,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To some perfection high and personal.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>"But yet the great of soul have ever been</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The first to glory in all works of art;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For from the genius-form would ever dart</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A light of inspiration, and a sheen</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As of new comings; and ourselves have seen</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Men of stern purpose to whose eyes would start</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sorrow at sight of sorrow though no heart</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Did riot underneath that chilly, screen;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And hence we judge such utterance native to</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The human soul—expression highest—best."</span>
						<br/>
						<span>—Nay, it is by such sign they will pursue,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Albeit unknowing, Beauty, without rest;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And failing in the search, themselves will fling</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Speechless before its shadow, worshipping.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>And how shall he whose mission is to bring</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The soul to worship at its rightful shrine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Seeing in Beauty what is most divine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Give out the mightiest impulse, and thus fling</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His soul into the future, scattering</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The living seed of wisdom? Shall there shine</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From underneath his hand a matchless line</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of high earth-beauties, till the wide world ring</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With the far clang that tells a missioned soul,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Kneeling to homage all about his feet?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Alas for such a gift were this the whole,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The only bread of life men had to eat!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lo, I behold them dead about him now,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And him the heart of death, for all that brow!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>If <i>Thou</i> didst pass by Art, thou didst not scorn</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The souls that by such symbol yearned in vain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From Truth and Love true nourishment to gain:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On thy warm breast, so chilly and forlorn</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fell these thy nurslings little more than born</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That thou wast anguished, and there fell a rain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From thy blest eyelids, and in grief and pain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou partedst from them yet one night and morn</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To find them wholesome food and nourishment</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Instead of what their blindness took for such,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Laying thyself a seed in earthen rent</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From which, outspringing to the willing touch,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Riseth for all thy children harvest great,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For which they will all learn to bless thee yet.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Thou sawest Beauty in the streaking cloud</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When grief lift up those eyelids; nor in scorn</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Broke ever on thine eyes the purple morn</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Along the cedar tops; to thee aloud</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Spake the night-solitude, when hushed and bowed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The earth lay at thy feet stony and worn;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Loving thou markedst when the lamb unshorn</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was glad before thee, and amongst the crowd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Famished and pent in cities did thine eye</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Read strangest glory—though in human art</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No record lives to tell us that thy heart</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bowed to its own deep beauty: deeper did lie</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The burden of thy mission, even whereby</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We know that Beauty liveth where Thou art.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Doubtless thine eyes have watched the sun aspire</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From that same Olivet, when back on thee</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Flushed upwards after some night-agony</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy proper Godhead, with a purer fire</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Purpling thy Infinite, and in strong desire</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou sattest in the dawn that was to be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Uplifted on our dark perplexity.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yea in thee lay thy soul, a living lyre,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And each wild beauty smote it, though the sound</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rung to the night-winds oft and desert air;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beneath thine eyes the lily paled more fair,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And each still shadow slanting on the ground</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lay sweetly on thee as commissioned there,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So full wast thou of eyes all round and round.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>And so thou neededst not our human skill</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To fix what thus were transient—there it grew</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wedded to thy perfection; and anew</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With every coming vision rose there still</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Some living principle which did fulfil</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy most legitimate manhood; and unto</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy soul all Nature rendered up its due</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With not a contradiction; and each hill</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And mountain torrent and each wandering light</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Grew out divinely on thy countenance,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whereon, as we are told, by word and glance</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy hearers read an ever strange delight—So</span>
						<br/>
						<span>strange to them thy Truth, they could not tell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What made thy message so unspeakable.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>And by such living witness didst thou preach:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not with blind hands of groping forward thrust</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into the darkness, gathering only dust,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But by this real sign—that thou didst reach,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In natural order, rising each from each,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy own ideals of the True and Just;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And that as thou didst live, even so he must</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who would aspire his fellow-men to teach,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Looking perpetual from new heights of Thought</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On his old self. Of art no scorner thou!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Instead of leafy chaplet, on thy brow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wearing the light of manhood, thou hast brought</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Death unto Life! Above all statues now,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Immortal Artist, hail! thy work is wrought!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Solemn and icy stand ye in my eyes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Far up into the niches of the Past,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ye marble statues, dim and holden fast</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Within your stony homes! nor human cries</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had shook you from your frozen phantasies</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or sent the life-blood through you, till there passed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Through all your chilly bulks a new life-blast</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From the Eternal Living, and ye rise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From out your stiffened postures rosy-warm,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Walking abroad a goodly company</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of living virtues at that wondrous charm,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As he with human heart and hand and eye</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Walked sorrowing upon our highways then,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Eternal Father's living gift to men!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>As the pent torrent in uneasy rest</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Under the griping rocks, doth ever keep</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A monstrous working as it lies asleep</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In the round hollow of some mountain's breast,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till where it hideth in its sweltering nest</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Some earthquake finds it, and its waters leap</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Forth to the sunshine down the mighty steep,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So in thee once was anguished forth the quest</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whereby man sought for life-power as he lay</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Under his own proud heart and black despair</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wedged fast and stifled up with loads of care,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet at dumb struggle with the tyrant clay;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou wentest down below the roots of prayer,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And he hath cried aloud since that same day!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>As he that parts in hatred from a friend</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mixing with other men forgets the woe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which anguished him when he beheld and lo</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Two souls had fled asunder which did bend</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Under the same blue heaven! yet ere the end,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When the loud world hath tossed him to and fro,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Will often strangely reappear that glow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At simplest memory which some chance may send,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Although much stronger bonds have lost their power:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So thou God-sent didst come in lowly guise,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Striking on simple chords,—not with surprise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or mightiest recollectings in that hour,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But like remembered fragrance of a flower</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A man with human heart and loving eyes.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<footer>
					<p>March, 1852.</p>
				</footer>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-a-song-sermon" epub:type="poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">A Song-Sermon:</h3>
					<p epub:type="subtitle">Job xiv. 13-15.</p>
					<p epub:type="subtitle">Rondel.</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Would that thou hid me in the grave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And kept me with death's gaoler-care;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until thy wrath away should wear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sentence fixed thy prisoner gave!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I would endure with patience brave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So thou remembered I was there!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would that thou hid me in the grave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And kept me with death's gaoler-care!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To see thy creature thou wouldst crave—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Desire thy handiwork so fair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then wouldst thou call through death's dank air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I would answer from the cave!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would that thou hid me in the grave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And kept me with death's gaoler-care!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-words-in-the-night" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Words in the Night</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I woke at midnight, and my heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My beating heart, said this to me:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou seest the moon, how calm and bright!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The world is fair by day and night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But what is that to thee?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One touch to me, down dips the light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over the land and sea.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All is mine, all is my own!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Toss the purple fountain high!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The breast of man is a vat of stone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am alive, I, only I!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>One little touch and all is dark—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The winter with its sparkling moons,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The spring with all her violets,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The crimson dawns and rich sunsets,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The autumn's yellowing noons!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I only toss my purple jets,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou art one that swoons</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon a night of gust and roar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shipwrecked among the waves, and seems</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Across the purple hills to roam:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet odours touch him from the foam,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And downward sinking still he dreams</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He walks the clover fields at home</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hears the rattling teams.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All is mine, all is my own!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Toss the purple fountain high!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The breast of man is a vat of stone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am alive, I, only I!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thou hast beheld a throated fountain spout</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full in the air, and in the downward spray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A hovering Iris span the marble tank,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, as the wind came, ever rose and sank,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Violet and red; so my continual play</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Makes beauty for the Gods with many a prank</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of human excellence, while they,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weary of all the noon, in shadows sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Supine and heavy-eyed rest in the boundless heat.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let the world's fountain play!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beauty is pleasant in the eyes of Jove;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Betwixt the wavering shadows where he lies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He marks the dancing column with his eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Celestial, and amid his inmost grove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upgathers all his limbs, serenely blest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lulled by the mellow noise of the great world's unrest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>One heart beats in all nature, differing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in the work it works; its doubts and clamours</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are but the waste and brunt of instruments</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherewith a work is done, or as the hammers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On forge Cyclopean plied beneath the rents</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of lowest Etna, conquering into shape</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hard and scattered ore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Choose thou narcotics, and the dizzy grape</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Outworking passion, lest with horrid crash</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy life go from thee in a night of pain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So tutoring thy vision, shall the flash</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of dove white-breasted be to thee no more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than a white stone heavy upon the plain.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Hark, the cock crows loud!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And without, all ghastly and ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a man uplift in his shroud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The white, white morn is propped on the hill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And adown from the eaves, pointed and chill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The icicles 'gin to glitter</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the birds with a warble short and shrill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pass by the chamber-window still—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a quick, uneasy twitter!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let me pump warm blood, for the cold is bitter;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wearily, wearily, one by one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men awake with the weary sun!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Life is a phantom shut in thee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am the master and keep the key;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So let me toss thee the days of old</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crimson and orange and green and gold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So let me fill thee yet again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a rush of dreams from my spout amain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all is mine, all is my own:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Toss the purple fountain high!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The breast of man is a vat of stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I am alive, I only, I!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-consider-the-ravens" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Consider the Ravens</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Lord, according to thy words,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have considered thy birds;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I find their life good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And better the better understood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sowing neither corn nor wheat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They have all that they can eat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reaping no more than they sow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They have more than they could stow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Having neither barn nor store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hungry again, they eat more.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Considering, I see too that they</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have a busy life, and plenty of play;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the earth they dig their bills deep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And work well though they do not heap;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then to play in the air they are not loath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And their nests between are better than both.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But this is when there blow no storms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When berries are plenty in winter, and worms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When feathers are rife, with oil enough—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To keep the cold out and send the rain off;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If there come, indeed, a long hard frost</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then it looks as thy birds were lost.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But I consider further, and find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A hungry bird has a free mind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He is hungry to-day, not to-morrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Steals no comfort, no grief doth borrow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This moment is his, thy will hath said it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The next is nothing till thou hast made it.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thy bird has pain, but has no fear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which is the worst of any gear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When cold and hunger and harm betide him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He does not take them and stuff inside him;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Content with the day's ill he has got,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He waits just, nor haggles with his lot:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Neither jumbles God's will</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With driblets from his own still.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But next I see, in my endeavour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy birds here do not live for ever;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That cold or hunger, sickness or age</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Finishes their earthly stage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rooks drop in cold nights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leaving all their wrongs and rights;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Birds lie here and birds lie there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With their feathers all astare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in thy own sermon, thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That the sparrow falls dost allow.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It shall not cause me any alarm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For neither so comes the bird to harm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seeing our father, thou hast said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is by the sparrow's dying bed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore it is a blessed place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the sparrow in high grace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It cometh therefore to this, Lord:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have considered thy word,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And henceforth will be thy bird.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-the-wind-of-the-world" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Wind of the World</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Chained is the Spring. The Night-wind bold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Blows over the hard earth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Time is not more confused and cold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor keeps more wintry mirth.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet blow, and roll the world about—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Blow, Time, blow, winter's Wind!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through chinks of time heaven peepeth out,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Spring the frost behind.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-sabbath-bells" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Sabbath Bells</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Oh holy Sabbath bells,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye have a pleasant voice!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through all the land your music swells,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And man with one commandment tells</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To rest and to rejoice.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As birds rejoice to flee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From dark and stormy skies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To brighter lands beyond the sea</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where skies are calm, and wings are free</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To wander and to rise;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As thirsty travellers sing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through desert paths that pass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hear the welcome waters spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And see, beyond the spray they fling</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tall trees and waving grass;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So we rejoice to know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your melody begun;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For when our paths are parched below</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye tell us where green pastures glow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And living waters run.</span>
				</p>
				<footer>
					<p>London, December 15, 1840.</p>
				</footer>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-fighting" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Fighting</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Here is a temple strangely wrought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within it I can see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two spirits of a diverse thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Contend for mastery.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>One is an angel fair and bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Adown the aisle comes he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adown the aisle in raiment white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A creature fair to see.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The other wears an evil mien,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he hath doubtless slipt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A fearful being dark and lean,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Up from the mouldy crypt.</span>
				</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>
					<span>Is that the roof that grows so black?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did some one call my name?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was it the bursting thunder crack</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That filled this place with flame?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I move—I wake from out my sleep:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some one hath victor been!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I see two radiant pinions sweep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I am borne between.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Beneath the clouds that under roll</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An upturned face I see—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A dead man's face, but, ah, the soul</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was right well known to me!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A man's dead face! Away I haste</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through regions calm and fair:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go vanquish sin, and thou shall taste</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The same celestial air.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-after-the-fashion-of-an-old-emblem" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">After the Fashion of an Old Emblem</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I have long enough been working down in my cellar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Working spade and pick, boring-chisel and drill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I long for wider spaces, airy, clear-dark, and stellar:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Successless labour never the love of it did fill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>More profit surely lies in a holy, pure quiescence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In a setting forth of cups to catch the heavenly rain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a yielding of the being to the ever waiting presence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In a lifting of the eyes upward, homeward again!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Up to my garret, its storm-windows and skylights!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There I'll lay me on the floor, and patient let the sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The moon and the stars, the blueness and the twilights</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Do what their pleasure is, and wait till they have done.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, lo, I hear a waving on the roof of great pinions!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">'Tis the labour of a windmill, broad-spreading to the wind!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, down there goes a. shaft through all the house-dominions!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I trace it to a cellar, whose door I cannot find.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But there I hear ever a keen diamond-drill in motion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now fast and now slow as the wind sits in the sails,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drilling and boring to the far eternal ocean,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The living well of all wells whose water never fails.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So now I go no more to the cellar to my labour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But up to my garret where those arms are ever going;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There the sky is ever o'er me, and the wind my blessed neighbour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the prayer-handle ready turns the sails to its blowing.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Blow, blow, my blessed wind; oh, keep ever blowing!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Keep the great windmill going full and free;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So shall the diamond-drill down below keep going</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till in burst the waters of God's eternal sea.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-george-rolleston" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">George Rolleston</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Dead art thou? No more dead than was the maid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Over whose couch the saving God did stand—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"She is not dead but sleepeth," said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And took her by the hand!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thee knowledge never from Life's pathway wiled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But following still where life's great father led,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He turned, and taking up his child,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Raised thee too from the dead,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O living, thou hast passed thy second birth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Found all things new, and some things lovely strange;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thou wilt not forget the earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or in thy loving change!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-a-prayer-in-sickness" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">A Prayer in Sickness</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thou foldest me in sickness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou callest through the cloud;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I batter with the thickness</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the swathing, blinding shroud:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh, let me see thy face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The only perfect grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That thou canst show thy child.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O father, being-giver,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Take off the sickness-cloud;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saviour, my life deliver</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From this dull body-shroud:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till I can see thy face</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am not full of grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I am not reconciled.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-quiet-dead" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Quiet Dead!</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Quiet, quiet dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have ye aught to say</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From your hidden bed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the earthy clay?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Fathers, children, mothers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye are very quiet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can ye shout, my brothers?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I would know you by it!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Have ye any words</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That are like to ours?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have ye any birds?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have ye any flowers?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Could ye rise a minute</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the sun is warm?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I would know you in it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I would take no harm.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I am half afraid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the ghostly night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If ye all obeyed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I should fear you quite.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But when day is breaking</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the purple east</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I would meet you waking—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One of you at least—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When the sun is tipping</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Every stony block,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the sun is slipping</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down the weathercock.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Quiet, quiet dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will not perplex you;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What my tongue hath said</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Haply it may vex you!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet I hear you speaking</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a quiet speech,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if ye were seeking</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Better things to teach:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Wait a little longer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Suffer and endure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till your heart is stronger</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And your eyes are pure—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A little longer, brother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With your fellow-men:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We will meet each other</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Otherwhere again."</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-let-your-light-so-shine" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Let Your Light So Shine</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Sometimes, O Lord, thou lightest in my head</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A lamp that well might pharos all the lands;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anon the light will neither rise nor spread:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shrouded in danger gray the beacon stands!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A pharos? Oh dull brain! poor dying lamp</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under a bushel with an earthy smell!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mouldering it stands, in rust and eating damp,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While the slow oil keeps oozing from its cell!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For me it were enough to be a flower</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Knowing its root in thee, the Living, hid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ordained to blossom at the appointed hour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wake or sleep as thou, my Nature, bid;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But hear my brethren in their darkling fright!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hearten my lamp that it may shine abroad</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then will they cry—Lo, there is something bright!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who kindled it if not the shining God?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-when-the-heart-is-a-cup" epub:type="poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Triolet</h3>
					<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">When the Heart Is a Cup</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>When the heart is a cup</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the body low lying,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wine, drop by drop</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Falls into that cup</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>From somewhere high up,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It is good to be dying</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the heart for a cup</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the body low lying.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-the-souls-rising" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Souls' Rising</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">See how the storm of life ascends</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up through the shadow of the world!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond our gaze the line extends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like wreaths of vapour tempest-hurled!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grasp tighter, brother, lest the storm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should sweep us down from where we stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And we may catch some human form</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We know, amongst the straining band.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">See! see in yonder misty cloud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One whirlwind sweep, and we shall hear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The voice that waxes yet more loud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And louder still approaching near!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Tremble not, brother, fear not thou,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For yonder wild and mystic strain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will bring before us strangely now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The visions of our youth again!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Listen! oh listen!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>See how its eyeballs roll and glisten</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a wild and fearful stare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upwards through the shining air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or backwards with averted look,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As a child were gazing at a book</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full of tales of fear and dread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the thick night-wind came hollow and dead.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Round about it, wavering and light.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the moths flock round a candle at night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A crowd of phantoms sheeted and dumb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strain to its words as they shrilly come:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brother, my brother, dost thou hear?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They pierce through the tumult sharp and clear!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">"The rush of speed is on my soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My eyes are blind with things I see;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I cannot grasp the awful whole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I cannot gird the mystery!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mountains sweep like mist away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The great sea shakes like flakes of fire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rush of things I cannot see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is mounting upward higher and higher!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh! life was still and full of calm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In yonder spot of earthly ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now it rolls a thunder-psalm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its voices drown my ear in sound!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would God I were a child again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To nurse the seeds of faith and power;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I might have clasped in wisdom then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wing to beat this awful hour!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dullest things would take my marks—</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>They</i> took my marks like drifted snow—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God! how the footsteps rise in sparks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rise like myself and onward go!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have pity, O ye driving things</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That once like me had human form!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I am driven for lack of wings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A shreddy cloud before the storm!"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">How its words went through me then,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a long forgotten pang,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till the storm's embrace again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swept it far with sudden clang!—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, methinks I see it still!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let us follow it, my brother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Keeping close to one another,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blessing God for might of will!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Closer, closer, side by side!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ours are wings that deftly glide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upwards, downwards, and crosswise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flashing past our ears and eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Splitting up the comet-tracks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a whirlwind at our backs!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">How the sky is blackening!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet the race is never slackening;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swift, continual, and strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Streams the torrent slope along,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a tidal surge of faces</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Molten into one despair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each the other now displaces,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A continual whirl of spaces;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, my fainting eyesight reels</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As I strive in vain to stare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On a thousand turning wheels</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dimly in the gloom descending,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faces with each other blending!—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let us beat the vapours back,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We are yet upon his track.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Didst thou see a spirit halt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upright on a cloudy peak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the lightning's horrid fault</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smote a gash into the cheek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the grinning thunder-cloud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which doth still besiege and crowd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upward from the nether pits</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where the monster Chaos sits,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Building o'er the fleeing rack</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Roofs of thunder long and black?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yes, I see it! I will shout</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till I stop the horrid rout.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ho, ho! spirit-phantom, tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is thy path to heaven or hell?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We would hear thee yet again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What thy standing amongst men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What thy former history,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thy hope of things to be!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wisdom still we gain from hearing:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We would know, we would know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whither thou art steering—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto weal or woe!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Ah, I cannot hear it speaking!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet it seems as it were seeking</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through our eyes our souls to reach</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a quaint mysterious speech,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As with stretched and crossing palms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One were tracing diagrams</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the ebbing of the beach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till with wild unmeasured dance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the tiptoe waves advance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seize him by the shoulder, cover,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turn him up and toss him over:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He is vanished from our sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nothing mars the quiet night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save a speck of gloom afar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like the ruin of a star!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Brother, streams it ever so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such a torrent tide of woe?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, I know not; let us haste</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upwards from this dreary waste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up to where like music flowing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gentler feet are ever going,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Streams of life encircling run</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Round about the spirit-sun!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up beyond the storm and rush</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With our lesson let us rise!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, the morning's golden flush</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meets us midway in the skies!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perished all the dream and strife!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Death is swallowed up of Life!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-awake" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Awake!</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">The stars are all watching;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">God's angel is catching</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At thy skirts in the darkness deep!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Gold hinges grating,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The mighty dead waiting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why dost thou sleep?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">Years without number,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Ages of slumber,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stiff in the track of the infinite One!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Dead, can I think it?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Dropt like a trinket,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thing whose uses are done!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">White wings are crossing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Glad waves are tossing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The earth flames out in crimson and green</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Spring is appearing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Summer is nearing—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where hast thou been?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">Down in some cavern,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Death's sleepy tavern,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Housing, carousing with spectres of night?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">There is my right hand!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Grasp it full tight and</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spring to the light.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">Wonder, oh, wonder!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">How the life-thunder</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bursts on his ear in horror and dread!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Happy shapes meet him;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Heaven and earth greet him:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Life from the dead!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-to-an-autograph-hunter" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">To an Autograph-Hunter</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Seek not my name—it doth no virtue bear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seek, seek thine own primeval name to find—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The name God called when thy ideal fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Arose in deeps of the eternal mind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When that thou findest, thou art straight a lord</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of time and space—art heir of all things grown;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And not my name, poor, earthly label-word,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But I myself thenceforward am thine own.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thou hearest not? Or hearest as a man</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who hears the muttering of a foolish spell?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My very shadow would feel strange and wan</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In thy abode:—I say <i>No</i>, and <i>Farewell</i>.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thou understandest? Then it is enough;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No shadow-deputy shall mock my friend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We walk the same path, over smooth and rough,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To meet ere long at the unending end.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-second-sight" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Second Sight</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Rich is the fancy which can double back</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All seeming forms, and from cold icicles</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Build up high glittering palaces where dwells</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Summer perfection, moulding all this wrack</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To spirit symmetry, and doth not lack</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The power to hear amidst the funeral bells</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The eternal heart's wind-melody which swells</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In whirlwind flashes all along its track!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So hath the sun made all the winter mine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With gardens springing round me fresh and fair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On hidden leaves uncounted jewels shine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I live with forms of beauty everywhere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Peopling the crumbling waste and icy pool</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With sights and sounds of life most beautiful.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-with-a-copy-of-in-memoriam" epub:type="poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">With a Copy of "In Memoriam"</h3>
					<p epub:type="subtitle">To E.M. II.</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Dear friend, you love the poet's song,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And here is one for your regard.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You know the "melancholy bard,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose grief is wise as well as strong;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Already something understand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For whom he mourns and what he sings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And how he wakes with golden strings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The echoes of "the silent land;"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>How, restless, faint, and worn with grief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet loving all and hoping all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gazes where the shadows fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And finds in darkness some relief;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And how he sends his cries across,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His cries for him that comes no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till one might think that silent shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full of the burden of his loss;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And how there comes sublimer cheer—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not darkness solacing sad eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not the wild joy of mournful cries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But light that makes his spirit clear;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>How, while he gazes, something high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Something of Heaven has fallen on him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His distance and his future dim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Broken into a dawning sky!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Something of this, dear friend, you know;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And will you take the book from me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That holds this mournful melody,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And softens grief to sadness so?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Perhaps it scarcely suits the day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of joyful hopes and memories clear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When love should have no thought of fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And only smiles be round your way;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet from the mystery and the gloom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From tempted faith and conquering trust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From spirit stronger than the dust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And love that looks beyond the tomb,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>What can there be but good to win,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But hope for life, but love for all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But strength whatever may befall?—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So for the year that you begin,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For all the years that follow this</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While a long happy life endures,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This hope, this love, this strength be yours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And afterwards a larger bliss!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>May nothing in this mournful song</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Too much take off your thoughts from time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For joy should fill your vernal prime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And peace your summer mild and long.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And may his love who can restore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All losses, give all new good things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like loving eyes and sheltering wings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be round us all for evermore!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-they-are-blind" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">They Are Blind</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>They are blind, and they are dead:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We will wake them as we go;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There are words have not been said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There are sounds they do not know:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">We will pipe and we will sing—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">With the Music and the Spring</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Set their hearts a wondering!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They are tired of what is old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We will give it voices new;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the half hath not been told</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the Beautiful and True.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Drowsy eyelids shut and sleeping!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Heavy eyes oppressed with weeping!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Flashes through the lashes leaping!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ye that have a pleasant voice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hither come without delay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye will never have a choice</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like to that ye have to-day:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Round the wide world we will go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Singing through the frost and snow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Till the daisies are in blow.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ye that cannot pipe or sing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ye must also come with speed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye must come, and with you bring</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Weighty word and weightier deed—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Helping hands and loving eyes!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">These will make them truly wise—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Then will be our Paradise.</span>
				</p>
				<footer>
					<p>March 27, 1852.</p>
				</footer>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-when-the-storm-was-proudest" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">When the Storm Was Proudest</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">When the storm was proudest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And the wind was loudest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I heard the hollow caverns drinking down below;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">When the stars were bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And the ground was white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I heard the grasses springing underneath the snow.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">Many voices spake—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The river to the lake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the iron-ribbed sky was talking to the sea;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And every starry spark</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Made music with the dark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said how bright and beautiful everything must be.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">When the sun was setting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">All the clouds were getting</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beautiful and silvery in the rising moon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Beneath the leafless trees</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Wrangling in the breeze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I could hardly see them for the leaves of June.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">When the day had ended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And the night descended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I heard the sound of streams that I heard not through the day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And every peak afar</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Was ready for a star,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they climbed and rolled around until the morning gray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">Then slumber soft and holy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Came down upon me slowly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I went I know not whither, and I lived I know not how;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">My glory had been banished,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">For when I woke it vanished;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I waited on its coming, and I am waiting now.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-the-deils-forhooit-his-ain" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Deil's Forhooit His Ain</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i4">
						<i>The Deil's forhooit his ain, his ain!</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i5">
						<i>The Deil's forhooit his ain!</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">
						<i>His bairns are greitin in ilka neuk,</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i5">
						<i>For the Deil's forhooit his ain.</i>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Deil he tuik his stick and his hat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his yallow gluves on he drew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"The coal's sae dear, and the preachin sae flat.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I canna be aye wi' you!"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<i>The Deil's, &amp;c.</i>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But I'll gie ye my blessin afore I gang,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wi' jist ae word o' advice;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gien onything efter that gaes wrang</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It'll be yer ain wull and ch'ice!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Noo hark: There's diseases gaein aboot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles are, and whiles a' thegither!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ane's ca'd Repentance—haith, hand it oot!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It comes wi' a change o' weather.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"For that, see aye 'at ye're gude at the spune</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tak yer fair share o' the drink;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gien ye dinna, I wadna won'er but sune</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ye micht 'maist begin to think!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Neist, luik efter yer liver; that's the place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whaur Conscience gars ye fin'!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some fowk has mair o' 't, and some has less—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It comes o' breedin in.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But there's waur nor diseases gaein aboot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There's a heap o' fair-spoken lees;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there's naething i' natur, in or oot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">'At waur with the health agrees.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"There's what they ca' Faith, 'at wad aye be fain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Houp that glowers, and tynes a';</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Love, that never yet faund its ain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But aye turnt its face to the wa'.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"And Trouth—the sough o' a sickly win';</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Richt—what needna be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Beauty—nae deeper nor the skin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Blude—that's naething but bree.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But there's ae gran' doctor for a' and mair—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For diseases and lees in a breath:—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My bairns, I lea' ye wi'oot a care</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To yer best freen, Doctor Death.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"He'll no distress ye: as quaiet's a cat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He grips ye, and a'thing's ower;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There's naething mair 'at ye wad be at,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There's never a sweet nor sour!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"They ca' 't a sleep, but it's better bliss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For ye wauken up no more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They ca' 't a mansion—and sae it is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the coffin-lid's the door!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Jist ae word mair—-and it's <i>verbum sat</i>—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I hae preacht it mony's the year:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whaur there's naething ava to be frictit at</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There's naething ava to fear.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"I dinna say 'at there isna a hell—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To lee wad be a disgrace!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I bide there whan I'm at hame mysel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And it's no sic a byous ill place!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Ye see yon blue thing they ca' the lift?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It's but hell turnt upside doun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A whummilt bossie, whiles fou o' drift,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And whiles o' a rumlin soun!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Lat auld wives tell their tales i' the reek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Men hae to du wi' fac's:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There's naebody there to watch, and keek</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Intil yer wee mistaks.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But nor ben there's naebody there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Frae the yird to the farthest spark;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye'll rub the knees o' yer breeks to the bare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Afore ye'll pray ye a sark!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Sae fare ye weel, my bonny men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And weel may ye thrive and the!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gien I dinna see ye some time again</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It'll be 'at ye're no to see."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He cockit his hat ower ane o' his cheeks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And awa wi' a halt and a spang—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For his tail was doun ae leg o' his breeks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his butes war a half ower lang.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i5">
						<i>The Deil's forhooit his ain, his ain!</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">
						<i>The Deil's forhooit his ain!</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i5">
						<i>His bairns are greitin in ilka neuk,</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">
						<i>For the Deil's forhooit his ain.</i>
					</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-the-auld-fisher" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Auld Fisher</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There was an auld fisher, he sat by the wa',</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An' luikit oot ower the sea;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bairnies war playin, he smil't on them a',</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the tear stude in his e'e.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">
						<i>An' it's—oh to win awa, awa!</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">
						<i>An' it's, oh to win awa</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<i>Whaur the bairns come hame, an' the wives they bide,</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">
						<i>An' God is the father o' a'!</i>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Jocky an' Jeamy an' Tammy oot there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A' i' the boatie gaed doon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An' I'm ower auld to fish ony mair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sae I hinna the chance to droon!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">
						<i>An' it's—oh to win awa, awa! &amp;c.</i>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>An' Jeannie she grat to ease her hert,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An' she easit hersel awa;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I'm ower auld for the tears to stert,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An' sae the sighs maun blaw.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">
						<i>An' it's—oh to win awa, awa! &amp;c.</i>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Lord, steer me hame whaur my Lord has steerit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For I'm tired o' life's rockin sea;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An' dinna be lang, for I'm growin that fearit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">'At I'm ablins ower auld to dee!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">
						<i>An' it's—oh to win awa, awa!</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">
						<i>An' it's, oh to win awa</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<i>Whaur the bairns come hame, an' the wives they bide,</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">
						<i>An' God is the father o' a'!</i>
					</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-not-understood" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Not Understood</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Tumultuous rushing o'er the outstretched plains;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wildered maze of comets and of suns;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The blood of changeless God that ever runs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With quick diastole up the immortal veins;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A phantom host that moves and works in chains;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A monstrous fiction, which, collapsing, stuns</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mind to stupor and amaze at once;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A tragedy which that man best explains</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who rushes blindly on his wild career</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With trampling hoofs and sound of mailed war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who will not nurse a life to win a tear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But is extinguished like a falling star;—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such will at times this life appear to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until I learn to read more perfectly.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-hom-il-v-403" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Hom. IL. v. 403.</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>If thou art tempted by a thought of ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crave not too soon for victory, nor deem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art a coward if thy safety seem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To spring too little from a righteous will;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For there is nightmare on thee, nor until</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy soul hath caught the morning's early gleam</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seek thou to analyze the monstrous dream</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By painful introversion; rather fill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thine eye with forms thou knowest to be truth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But see thou cherish higher hope than this,—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>hope hereafter that thou shall be fit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Calm-eyed to face distortion, and to sit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Transparent among other forms of youth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who own no impulse save to God and bliss.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-the-dawn" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Dawn</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And must I ever wake, gray dawn, to know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee standing sadly by me like a ghost?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am perplexed with thee that thou shouldst cost</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This earth another turning! All aglow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shouldst have reached me, with a purple show</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Along far mountain-tops! and I would post</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over the breadth of seas, though I were lost</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the hot phantom-chase for life, if so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou earnest ever with this numbing sense</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of chilly distance and unlovely light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Waking this gnawing soul anew to fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With its perpetual load: I drive thee hence!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have another mountain-range from whence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bursteth a sun unutterably bright!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-galileo" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Galileo</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>"And yet it moves!" Ah, Truth, where wert thou then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When all for thee they racked each piteous limb?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wert thou in heaven, and busy with thy hymn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When those poor hands convulsed that held thy pen?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Art thou a phantom that deceives! men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To their undoing? or dost thou watch him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pale, cold, and silent in his dungeon dim?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wilt thou ever speak to him again?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"It moves, it moves! Alas, my flesh was weak!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That was a hideous dream! I'll cry aloud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How the green bulk wheels sunward day by day!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah me! ah me! perchance my heart was proud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I alone should know that word to speak!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now, sweet Truth, shine upon these, I pray."</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-subsidy" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Subsidy</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>If thou wouldst live the Truth in very deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou hast thy joy, but thou hast more of pain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Others will live in peace, and thou be fain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bargain with despair, and in thy need</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make thy meal upon the scantiest weed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These palaces, for thee they stand in vain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thine is a ruinous hut, and oft the rain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall drench thee in the midnight; yea, the speed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of earth outstrip thee, pilgrim, while thy feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Move slowly up the heights. Yet will there come</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the time-rents about thy moving cell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<i>Shot from the Truth's own bow, and flaming sweet,</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An arrow for despair, and oft the hum</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of far-off populous realms where spirits dwell.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-the-prophet" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Prophet</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Speak, Prophet of the Lord! We may not start</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To find thee with us in thine ancient dress,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Haggard and pale from some bleak wilderness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Empty of all save God and thy loud heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor with like rugged message quick to dart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the hideous fiction mean and base;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But yet, O prophet man, we need not less</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But more of earnest, though it is thy part</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To deal in other words, if thou wouldst smite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The living Mammon, seated, not as then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In bestial quiescence grimly dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But <i>robed as priest, and honoured of good men</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Yet</i> thrice as much an idol-god as when</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He stared at his own feet from morn to night.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-the-watcher" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Watcher</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>From out a windy cleft there comes a gaze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of eyes unearthly, which go to and fro</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the people's tumult, for below</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The nations smite each other: no amaze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Troubles their liquid rolling, or affrays</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their deep-set contemplation; steadily glow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those ever holier eyeballs, for they grow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Liker unto the eyes of one that prays.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if those clasped hands tremble, comes a power</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As of the might of worlds, and they are holden</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blessing above us in the sunrise golden;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they will be uplifted till that hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of terrible rolling which shall rise and shake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This conscious nightmare from us, and we wake.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-the-beloved-disciple" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Beloved Disciple</h3>
				</header>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>One do I see and twelve; but second there</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Methinks I know thee, thou beloved one;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not from thy nobler port, for there are none</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More quiet-featured: some there are who bear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Their message on their brows, while others wear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A look of large commission, nor will shun</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The fiery trial, so their work is done;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But thou hast parted with thine eyes in prayer—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unearthly are they both; and so thy lips</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Seem like the porches of the spirit land;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For thou hast laid a mighty treasure by</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unlocked by Him in Nature, and thine eye</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Burns with a vision and apocalypse</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy own sweet soul can hardly understand.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>A Boanerges too! Upon my heart</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It lay a heavy hour: features like thine</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Should glow with other message than the shine</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of the earth-burrowing levin, and the start</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That cleaveth horrid gulfs! Awful and swart</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A moment stoodest thou, but less divine—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Brawny and clad in ruin—till with mine</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy heart made answering signals, and apart</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beamed forth thy two rapt eyeballs doubly clear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And twice as strong because thou didst thy duty,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, though affianced to immortal Beauty,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hiddest not weakly underneath her veil</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The pest of Sin and Death which maketh pale:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Henceforward be thy spirit doubly dear!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-the-lily-of-the-valley" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Lily of the Valley</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There is not any weed but hath its shower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is not any pool but hath its star;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And black and muddy though the waters are</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We may not miss the glory of a flower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And winter moons will give them magic power</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To spin in cylinders of diamond spar;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And everything hath beauty near and far,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And keepeth close and waiteth on its hour!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I, when I encounter on my road</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A human soul that looketh black and grim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall I more ceremonious be than God?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall I refuse to watch one hour with him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who once beside our deepest woe did bud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A patient watching flower about the brim?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-evil-influence" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Evil Influence</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>'Tis not the violent hands alone that bring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The curse, the ravage, and the downward doom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although to these full oft the yawning tomb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Owes deadly surfeit; but a keener sting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A more immortal agony will cling</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the half fashioned sin which would assume</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair Virtue's garb; the eye that sows the gloom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With quiet seeds of Death henceforth to spring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What time the sun of passion burning fierce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Breaks through the kindly cloud of circumstance;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bitter word, and the unkindly glance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The crust and canker coming with the years,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are liker Death than arrows and the lance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which through the living heart at once doth pierce.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-spoken-of-several-philosophers" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Spoken of Several Philosophers</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I pray you, all ye men who put your trust</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In moulds and systems and well-tackled gear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Holding that Nature lives from year to year</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In one continual round because she must—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Set me not down, I pray you, in the dust</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all these centuries, like a pot of beer—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A pewter-pot disconsolately clear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which holds a potful, as is right and just!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will grow clamorous—by the rood, I will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If thus ye use me like a pewter pot!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Good friend, thou art a toper and a sot—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>will not be the lead to hold thy swill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor any lead: I will arise and spill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy silly beverage—spill it piping hot!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-nature-a-moral-power" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Nature a Moral Power</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Nature, to him no message dost thou bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who in thy beauty findeth not the power</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To gird himself more strongly for the hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of night and darkness. Oh, what colours rare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The woods, the valleys, and the mountains wear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To him who knows thy secret, and, in shower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fog, and ice-cloud, hath a secret bower</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where he may rest until the heavens are fair!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not with the rest of slumber, but the trance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of onward movement steady and serene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where oft, in struggle and in contest keen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His eyes will opened be, and all the dance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of life break on him, and a wide expanse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Roll upward through the void, sunny and green.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-to-june" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">To June</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Ah, truant, thou art here again, I see!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For in a season of such wretched weather</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I thought that thou hadst left us altogether,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although I could not choose but fancy thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Skulking about the hill-tops, whence the glee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of thy blue laughter peeped at times, or rather</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy bashful awkwardness, as doubtful whether</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shouldst be seen in such a company</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of ugly runaways, unshapely heaps</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of ruffian vapour, broken from restraint</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of their slim prison in the ocean deeps.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But yet I may not chide: fall to thy books—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fall to immediately without complaint—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There they are lying, hills and vales and brooks.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-summer" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Summer</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Summer, sweet Summer, many-fingered Summer!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We hold thee very dear, as well we may:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is the kernel of the year to-day—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All hail to thee! thou art a welcome comer!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If every insect were a fairy drummer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I a fifer that could deftly play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We'd give the old Earth such a roundelay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That she would cast all thought of labour from her.—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! what is this upon my window-pane?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some sulky, drooping cloud comes pouting up,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stamping its glittering feet along the plain!—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well, I will let that idle fancy drop!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh, how the spouts are bubbling with the rain!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the earth shines like a silver cup!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-on-a-midge" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">On a Midge</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Whence do ye come, ye creatures? Each of you</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is perfect as an angel! wings and eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stupendous in their beauty—gorgeous dyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In feathery fields of purple and of blue!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would God I saw a moment as ye do!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I would become a molecule in size,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rest with you, hum with you, or slanting rise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Along your one dear sunbeam, could I view</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pearly secret which each tiny fly—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each tiny fly that hums and bobs and stirs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hides in its little breast eternally</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From you, ye prickly, grim philosophers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all your theories that sound so high:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hark to the buz a moment, my good sirs!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-steadfast" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Steadfast</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Here stands a giant stone from whose far top</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Comes down the sounding water: let me gaze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till every sense of man and human ways</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is wrecked and quenched for ever, and I drop</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the whirl of time, and without stop</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pass downward thus! Again my eyes I raise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To thee, dark rock; and through the mist and haze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My strength returns when I behold thy prop</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gleam stern and steady through the wavering wrack.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Surely thy strength is human, and like me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou bearest loads of thunder on thy back!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, lo, a smile upon thy visage black—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A breezy tuft of grass which I can see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Waving serenely from a sunlit crack!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-provision" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Provision</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Above my head the great pine-branches tower;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Backwards and forwards each to the other bends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beckoning the tempest-cloud which hither wends</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a slow-laboured thought, heavy with power:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hark to the patter of the coming shower!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let me be silent while the Almighty sends</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His thunder-word along—but when it ends</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will arise and fashion from the hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Words of stupendous import, fit to guard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High thoughts and purposes, which I may wave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the temptation cometh close and hard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like fiery brands betwixt me and the grave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of meaner things—to which I am a slave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If evermore I keep not watch and ward.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-first-sight-of-the-sea" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">First Sight of the Sea</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I do remember how, when very young,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw the great sea first, and heard its swell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As I drew nearer, caught within the spell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of its vast size and its mysterious tongue.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How the floor trembled, and the dark boat swung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a man in it, and a great wave fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within a stone's cast! Words may never tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The passion of the moment, when I flung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All childish records by, and felt arise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thing that died no more! An awful power</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I claimed with trembling hands and eager eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mine, mine for ever, an immortal dower.—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The noise of waters soundeth to this hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I look seaward through the quiet skies.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-on-the-source-of-the-arve" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">On the Source of the Arve</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Hears't thou the dash of water, loud and hoarse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With its perpetual tidings upward climb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Struggling against the wind? Oh, how sublime!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For not in vain from its portentous source</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy heart, wild stream, hath yearned for its full force,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But from thine ice-toothed caverns, dark as time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last thou issuest, dancing to the rime</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of thy outvolleying freedom! Lo, thy course</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lies straight before thee as the arrow flies!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Right to the ocean-plains away, away!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy parent waits thee, and her sunset dyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are ruffled for thy coming, and the gray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all her glittering borders flashes high</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against the glittering rocks!—oh, haste, and fly!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-confidence" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Confidence</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Lie down upon the ground, thou hopeless one!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Press thy face in the grass, and do not speak.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dost feel the green globe whirl? Seven times a week</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Climbeth she out of darkness to the sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which is her God; seven times she doth not shun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Awful eclipse, laying her patient cheek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon a pillow ghost-beset with shriek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of voices utterless, which rave and run</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through all the star-penumbra, craving light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tidings of the dawn from East and West.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Calmly she sleepeth, and her sleep is blest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With heavenly visions, and the joy of Night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Treading aloft with moons; nor hath she fright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though cloudy tempests beat upon her breast.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-fate" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Fate</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Oft, as I rest in quiet peace, am I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thrust out at sudden doors, and madly driven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through desert solitudes, and thunder-riven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Black passages which have not any sky:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The scourge is on me now, with all the cry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of ancient life that hath with murder striven.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How many an anguish hath gone up to heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How many a hand in prayer been lifted high</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the black fate came onward with the rush</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of whirlwind, avalanche, or fiery spume!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even at my feet is cleft a shivering tomb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath the waves; or else, with solemn hush</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The graveyard opens, and I feel a crush</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if we were all huddled in one doom!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-unrest" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Unrest</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Comes there, O Earth, no breathing time for thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No pause upon thy many-chequered lands?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now resting on my bed with listless hands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I mourn thee resting not. Continually</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hear I the plashing borders of the sea</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Answer each other from the rocks and sands!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Troop all the rivers seawards; nothing stands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But with strange noises hasteth terribly!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loam-eared hyenas go a moaning by;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Howls to each other all the bloody crew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Afric's tigers! but, O men, from you</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Comes this perpetual sound more loud and high</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than aught that vexes air! I hear the cry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of infant generations rising too!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-my-two-geniuses" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">My Two Geniuses</h3>
				</header>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>One is a slow and melancholy maid;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I know riot if she cometh from the skies</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or from the sleepy gulfs, but she will rise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Often before me in the twilight shade,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Holding a bunch of poppies and a blade</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of springing wheat: prostrate my body lies</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Before her on the turf, the while she ties</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A fillet of the weed about my head;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And in the gaps of sleep I seem to hear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A gentle rustle like the stir of corn,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And words like odours thronging to my ear:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>"Lie still, beloved—still until the morn;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lie still with me upon this rolling sphere—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Still till the judgment; thou art faint and worn."</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>The other meets me in the public throng;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her hair streams backward from her loose attire;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She hath a trumpet and an eye of fire;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She points me downward, steadily and long:—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>"There is thy grave—arise, my son, be strong!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hands are upon thy crown—awake, aspire</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To immortality; heed not the lyre</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of the Enchantress, nor her poppy-song,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But in the stillness of the summer calm</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tremble for what is Godlike in thy being.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Listen a while, and thou shall hear the psalm</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of victory sung by creatures past thy seeing;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And from far battle-fields there comes the neighing</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of dreadful onset, though the air is balm."</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Maid with the poppies, must I let thee go?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Alas, I may not; thou art likewise dear!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I am but human, and thou hast a tear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When she hath nought but splendour, and the glow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of a wild energy that mocks the flow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of the poor sympathies which keep us here:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lay past thy poppies, and come twice as near,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And I will teach thee, and thou too shalt grow;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And thou shalt walk with me in open day</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Through the rough thoroughfares with quiet grace;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And the wild-visaged maid shall lead the way,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Timing her footsteps to a gentler pace</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As her great orbs turn ever on thy face,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Drinking in draughts of loving help alway.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-sudden-calm" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Sudden Calm</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There is a bellowing in me, as of might</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unfleshed and visionless, mangling the air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With horrible convulse, as if it bare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cruel weight of worlds, but could not fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the thick-dropping clods, and could but bite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A vapour-cloud! Oh, I will climb the stair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the great universe, and lay me there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even at the threshold of his gate, despite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The tempest, and the weakness, and the rush</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of this quick crowding on me!—Oh, I dream!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now I am sailing swiftly, as we seem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To do in sleep! and I can hear the gush</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of a melodious wave that carries me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On, on for ever to eternity!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-thou-also" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Thou Also</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Cry out upon the crime, and then let slip</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dogs of hate, whose hanging muzzles track</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bloody secret; let the welkin crack</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reverberating, while ye dance and skip</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About the horrid blaze! or else ye strip,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More secretly, for the avenging rack,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him who hath done the deed, till, oozing black</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye watch the anguish from his nostrils drip,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the knotted limbs lie quivering!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, if your hearts disdain such banqueting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With wide and tearless eyes go staring through</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The murder cells! but think—that, if your knees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bow not to holiness, then even in you</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lie deeper gulfs and blacker crimes than these.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-aurora-borealis" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Aurora Borealis</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now have I grown a sharpness and an edge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto my future nights, and I will cut</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sheer through the ebon gates that yet will shut</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On every set of day; or as a sledge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drawn over snowy plains; where not a hedge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Breaks this Aurora's dancing, nothing but</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The one cold Esquimaux' unlikely hut</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That swims in the broad moonlight! Lo, a wedge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the clean meteor hath been brightly driven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Right home into the fastness of the north!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anon it quickeneth up into the heaven!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I with it have clomb and spreaded forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the crisp and cooling atmosphere!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My soul is all abroad: I cannot find it here!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-the-human" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Human</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Within each living man there doth reside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In some unrifled chamber of the heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A hidden treasure: wayward as thou art</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I love thee, man, and bind thee to my side!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By that sweet act I purify my pride</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hasten onward—willing even to part</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With pleasant graces: though thy hue is swart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I bear thee company, thou art my guide!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even in thy sinning wise beyond thy ken</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To thee a subtle debt my soul is owing!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I take an impulse from the worst of men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That lends a wing unto my onward going;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then let me pay them gladly back again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With prayer and love from Faith and Duty flowing!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-written-on-a-stormy-night" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Written on a Stormy Night</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>O wild and dark! a night hath found me now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherein I mingle with that element</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sent madly loose through the wide staring rent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In yon tormented branches! I will bow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A while unto the storm, and thenceforth grow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into a mighty patience strongly bent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before the unconquering Power which hither sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These winds to fight their battles on my brow!—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Again the loud boughs thunder! and the din</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Licks up my footfall from the hissing earth!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I have found a mighty peace within,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I have risen into a home of mirth!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wildly I climb above the shaking spires,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Above the sobbing clouds, up through the steady fires!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-reverence-waking-hope" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Reverence Waking Hope</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A power is on me, and my soul must speak</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To thee, thou grey, grey man, whom I behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With those white-headed children. I am bold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To commune with thy setting, and to wreak</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My doubts on thy grey hair; for I would seek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee in that other world, but I am told</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou goest elsewhere and wilt never hold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy head so high as now. Oh I were weak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weak even to despair, could I forego</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The tender vision which will give somehow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee standing brightly one day even as now!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art a very grey old man, and so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I may not pass thee darkly, but bestow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A look of reverence on thy wrinkled brow.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-born-of-water" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Born of Water</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Methought I stood among the stars alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Watching a grey parched orb which onward flew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Half blinded by the dusty winds that blew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Empty as Death and barren as a stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pleasant sound of water all unknown!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When, as I looked in wonderment, there grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High in the air above, a drop of dew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, gathering slowly through long cycles, shone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a great tear; and then at last it fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clasping the orb, which drank it greedily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a delicious noise and upward swell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of sweet cool joy that tossed me like a sea;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then the thick life sprang as from a grave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With trees, flowers, boats upon the bounding wave!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-to-a-thunder-cloud" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">To a Thunder-Cloud</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Oh, melancholy fragment of the night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drawing thy lazy web against the sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shouldst have waited till the day was done</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With kindred glooms to build thy fane aright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sublime amid the ruins of the light!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thus to shape our glories one by one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With fearful hands, ere we had well begun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To look for shadows—even in the bright!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet may we charm a lesson from thy breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A secret wisdom from thy folds of thunder:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is a wind that cometh from the west</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will rend thy tottering piles of gloom asunder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fling thee ruinous along the grass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To sparkle on us as our footsteps pass!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-sun-and-moon" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Sun and Moon</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>First came the red-eyed sun as I did wake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He smote me on the temples and I rose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Casting the night aside and all its woes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I would spurn my idleness, and take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My own wild journey even like him, and shake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pillars of all doubt with lusty blows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even like himself when his rich glory goes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Right through the stalwart fogs that part and break.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ere my soul was ready for the fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His solemn setting mocked me in the west;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as I trembled in the lifting night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The white moon met me, and my heart confess'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A mellow wisdom in her silent youth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which fed my hope with fear, and made my strength a truth.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-doubt-heralding-vision" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Doubt Heralding Vision</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>An angel saw me sitting by a brook,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pleased with the silence, and the melodies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of wind and water which did fall and rise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He gently stirred his plumes and from them shook</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An outworn doubt, which fell on me and took</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The shape of darkness, hiding all the skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blinding the sun, but giving to my eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An inextinguishable wish to look;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When, lo! thick as the buds of spring there came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crowd upon crowd, informing all the sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A host of splendours watching silently,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With lustrous eyes that wept as if in blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And waving hands that crossed in lines of flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And signalled things I hope to hold although I die!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-life-or-death" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Life of Death?</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Is there a secret Joy, that may not weep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For every flower that ends its little span,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For every child that groweth up to man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For every captive bird a cage doth keep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For every aching eye that went to sleep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long ages back, when other eyes began</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see and know and love as now they can,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unravelling God's wonders heap by heap?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or doth the Past lie 'mid Eternity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In charnel dens that rot and reek alway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A dismal light for those that go astray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A pit of foul deformity—to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beauty, a dreadful source of growth for thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When thou wouldst lift thine eyes to greet the day?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-lost-and-found" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Lost and Found</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I missed him when the sun began to bend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I found him not when I had lost his rim;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With many tears I went in search of him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Climbing high mountains which did still ascend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gave me echoes when I called my friend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through cities vast and charnel-houses grim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And high cathedrals where the light was dim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through books and arts and works without an end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But found him not—the friend whom I had lost.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet I found him—as I found the lark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sound in fields I heard but could not mark;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I found him nearest when I missed him most;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I found him in my heart, a life in frost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A light I knew not till my soul was dark.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-the-moon" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Moon</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>She comes! again she comes, the bright-eyed moon!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under a ragged cloud I found her out,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clasping her own dark orb like hope in doubt!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ragged cloud hath waited her since noon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he hath found and he will hide her soon!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come, all ye little winds that sit without,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And blow the shining leaves her edge about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hold her fast—ye have a pleasant tune!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She will forget us in her walks at night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the other worlds that are so fair!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She will forget to look on our despair!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She will forget to be so young and bright!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nay, gentle moon, thou hast the keys of light—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw them hanging by thy girdle there!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-truth-not-form" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Truth, Not Form!</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I came upon a fountain on my way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When it was hot, and sat me down to drink</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its sparkling stream, when all around the brink</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I spied full many vessels made of clay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereon were written, not without display,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In deep engraving or with merely ink,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The blessings which each owner seemed to think</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would light on him who drank with each alway.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I looked so hard my eyes were looking double</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into them all, but when I came to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That they were filthy, each in his degree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I bent my head, though not without some trouble,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To where the little waves did leap and bubble,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so I journeyed on most pleasantly.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-god-in-growth" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">God in Growth</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I said, I will arise and work some thing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor be content with growth, but cause to grow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A life around me, clear as yes from no,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That to my restless hand some rest may bring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And give a vital power to Action's spring:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus, I must cease to be! I cried; when, lo!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An angel stood beside me on the snow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With folded wings that came of pondering.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"God's glory flashes on the silence here</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath the moon," he cried, and upward threw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His glorious eyes that swept the utmost blue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Ere yet his bounding brooks run forth with cheer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bear his message to the hidden year</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who cometh up in haste to make his glory new."</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-in-a-churchyard" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">In a Churchyard</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There may be seeming calm above, but no!—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is a pulse below which ceases not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A subterranean working, fiery hot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deep in the million-hearted bosom, though</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Earthquakes unlock not the prodigious show</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of elemental conflict; and this spot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nurses most quiet bones which lie and rot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And here the humblest weeds take root and grow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is a calm upon the mighty sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet are its depths alive and full of being,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enormous bulks that move unwieldily;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, pore we on it, they are past our seeing!—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the deep sea-weed fields, though wide and ample,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Comes there no rushing sound: <i>these</i> do not trample!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-power" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Power</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Power that is not of God, however great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is but the downward rushing and the glare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of a swift meteor that hath lost its share</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the one impulse which doth animate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The parent mass: emblem to me of fate!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which through vast nightly wastes doth onward fare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wild-eyed and headlong, rent away from prayer—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A moment brilliant, then most desolate!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, O my brothers, shall we ever learn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From all the things we see continually</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That pride is but the empty mockery</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of what is strong in man! Not so the stern</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sweet repose of soul which we can earn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only through reverence and humility!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-yes-there-is-one-who-makes-us-all-lay-down" epub:type="poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Death</h3>
					<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">Yes, There Is One Who Makes Us All Lay Down</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Yes, there is one who makes us all lay down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our mushroom vanities, our speculations,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our well-set theories and calculations,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our workman's jacket or our monarch's crown!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To him alike the country and the town,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Barbaric hordes or civilized nations,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men of all names and ranks and occupations,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Squire, parson, lawyer, Jones, or Smith, or Brown!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He stops the carter: the uplifted whip</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Falls dreamily among the horses' straw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He stops the helmsman, and the gallant ship</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Holdeth to westward by another law;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No one will see him, no one ever saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he sees all and lets not any slip.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-that-holy-thing" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">That Holy Thing</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>They all were looking for a king</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To slay their foes, and lift them high:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou cam'st a little baby thing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That made a woman cry.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O son of man, to right my lot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nought but thy presence can avail;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet on the road thy wheels are not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor on the sea thy sail!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>My fancied ways why shouldst thou heed?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou com'st down thine own secret stair:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Com'st down to answer all my need,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yea, every bygone prayer!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-the-herd-and-the-mavis" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Herd and the Mavis</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>"What gars ye sing," said the herd-laddie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"What gars ye sing sae lood?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"To tice them oot o' the yerd, laddie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The worms for my daily food."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">
						<i>An' aye he sang, an' better he sang,</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">
						<i>An' the worms creepit in an' oot;</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">
						<i>An' ane he tuik, an' twa he loot gang,</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">
						<i>An' still he carolled stoot.</i>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"It's no for the worms, sir," said the herd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"They comena for your sang!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Think ye sae, sir?" answered the bird,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Maybe ye're no i' the wrang!"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">
						<i>But aye &amp;c.</i>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Sing ye young Sorrow to beguile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or to gie auld Fear the flegs?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Na," quo' the mavis, "I sing to wile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My wee things oot o' her eggs."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">
						<i>An' aye &amp;c.</i>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"The mistress is plenty for that same gear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though ye sangna air nor late!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"I wud draw the deid frae the moul sae drear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An' open the kirkyard-gate."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">
						<i>An' aye &amp;c.</i>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Better ye sing nor a burn i' the mune,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor a wave ower san' that flows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor a win' wi' the glintin stars abune,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An' aneth the roses in rows;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">
						<i>An' aye &amp;c.</i>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But a better sang it wud tak nor yer ain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though ye hae o' notes a feck,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To mak the auld Barebanes there sae fain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As to lift the muckle sneck!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">
						<i>An' aye &amp;c.</i>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>An' ye wudna draw ae bairnie back</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Frae the arms o' the bonny man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though its minnie was greitin alas an' alack,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An' her cries to the bairnie wan!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">
						<i>An' aye &amp;c.</i>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>An' I'll speir ye nae mair, sir," said the herd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"I fear what ye micht say neist!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"I doobt ye wud won'er, sir," said the bird,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"To see the thouchts i' my breist!"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">
						<i>An' aye he sang, an' better he sang,</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">
						<i>An' the worms creepit in an' oot;</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">
						<i>An' ane he tuik, an' twa he loot gang,</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">
						<i>An' still he carolled stoot.</i>
					</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-a-lown-nicht" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">A Lown Nicht</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Rose o' my hert,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Open yer leaves to the lampin mune;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the curls lat her keek an' dert,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She'll tak the colour but gie ye tune.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Buik o' my brain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Open yer faulds to the starry signs;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lat the e'en o' the holy luik an' strain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lat them glimmer an' score atween the lines.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Cup o' my soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Goud an' diamond an' ruby cup,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye're noucht ava but a toom dry bowl</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till the wine o' the kingdom fill ye up.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Conscience-glass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mirror the en'less All in thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Melt the boundered and make it pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the tideless, shoreless sea.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Warl o' my life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Swing thee roun thy sunny track;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fire an' win' an' water an' strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Carry them a' to the glory back.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-what-man-is-there-of-you" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">What Man Is There of You?</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The homely words how often read!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How seldom fully known!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Which father of you, asked for bread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would give his son a stone?"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>How oft has bitter tear been shed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And heaved how many a groan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because thou wouldst not give for bread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The thing that was a stone!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>How oft the child thou wouldst have fed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy gift away has thrown!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He prayed, thou heard'st, and gav'st the bread:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He cried, "It is a stone!"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Lord, if I ask in doubt and dread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lest I be left to moan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Am I not he who, asked for bread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would give his son a stone?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-bell-upon-organ" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Bell Upon Organ</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">It's all very well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said the Bell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be the big Organ below!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the folk come and go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said the Bell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And you never can tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What sort of person the Organ will blow!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, besides, it is much at the mercy of the weather</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For 'tis all made in pieces and glued together!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">But up in my cell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Next door to the sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said the Bell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I dwell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Very high;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with glorious go</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I swing to and fro;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I swing swift or slow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I swing as I please,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With summons or knell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I swing at my ease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said the Bell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not the tallest of men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can reach up to touch me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To smirch me or smutch me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or make me do what</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I would not be at!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, then,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The weather can't cause me to shrink or increase:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I chose to be made in one perfect piece!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-o-wind-of-god" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">O Wind of God</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>O wind of God, that blowest in the mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Blow, blow and wake the gentle spring in me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blow, swifter blow, a strong warm summer wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till all the flowers with eyes come out to see;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Blow till the fruit hangs red on every tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And our high-soaring song-larks meet thy dove—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High the imperfect soars, descends the perfect love!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Blow not the less though winter cometh then;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Blow, wind of God, blow hither changes keen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let the spring creep into the ground again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The flowers close all their eyes and not be seen:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All lives in thee that ever once hath been!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blow, fill my upper air with icy storms;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Breathe cold, O wind of God, and kill my cankerworms.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-the-home-of-death" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Home of Death</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>"Death, whaur do ye bide, auld Death?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"I bide in ilka breath,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quo' Death;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"No i' the pyramids,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No whaur the wormie rids</span>
					<br/>
					<span>'Neth coffin-lids;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I bidena whaur life has been,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An' whaur's nae mair to be dune."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Death, whaur do ye bide, auld Death?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Wi' the leevin, to dee 'at are laith,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quo' Death;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Wi' the man an' the wife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>'At loo like life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bot strife;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wi' the bairns 'at hing to their mither,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wi' a' 'at loo ane anither."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Death, whaur do ye bide, auld Death?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Abune an' aboot an' aneth,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quo' Death;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"But o' a' the airts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An' o' a' the pairts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In herts—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whan the tane to the tither says, Na,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An' the north win' begins to blaw."</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-shall-the-dead-praise-thee" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Shall the Dead Praise Thee?</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I cannot praise thee. By his instrument</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The master sits, and moves nor foot nor hand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For see the organ-pipes this, that way bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Leaning, o'erthrown, like wheat-stalks tempest-fanned!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I well could praise thee for a flower, a dove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But not for life that is not life in me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not for a being that is less than love—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A barren shoal half lifted from a sea!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Unto a land where no wind bloweth ships</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy wind one day will blow me to my own:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rather I'd kiss no more their loving lips</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than carry them a heart so poor and prone!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I bless thee, Father, thou art what thou art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That thou dost know thyself what thou dost know—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A perfect, simple, tender, rhythmic heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beating its blood to all in bounteous flow.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And I can bless thee too for every smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For every disappointment, ache, and fear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For every hook thou fixest in my heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For every burning cord that draws me near.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But prayer these wake, not song. Thyself I crave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Come thou, or all thy gifts away I fling.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou silent, I am but an empty grave:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Think to me, Father, and I am a king!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>My organ-pipes will then stand up awake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their life soar, as from smouldering wood the blaze;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And swift contending harmonies shall shake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy windows with a storm of jubilant praise.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-one-with-nature" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">One With Nature</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I have a fellowship with every shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of changing nature: with the tempest hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My soul goes forth to claim her early dower</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of living princedom; and her wings have staid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amidst the wildest uproar undismayed!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet she hath often owned a better power,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And blessed the gentle coming of the shower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The speechless majesty of love arrayed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In lowly virtue, under which disguise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full many a princely thing hath passed her by;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she from homely intercourse of eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath gathered visions wider than the sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And seen the withered heart of man arise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Peaceful as God, and full of majesty.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-a-year-song" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">A Year Song</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Sighing above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Rustling below,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thorough the woods</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The winds go.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beneath, dead crowds;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Above, life bare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the besom tempest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Sweeps the air:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<i>Heart, leave thy woe:</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<i>Let the dead things go.</i>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Through the brown</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Gold doth push;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Misty green</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Veils the bush.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here a twitter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">There a croak!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They are coming—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The spring-folk!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<i>Heart, be not numb;</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<i>Let the live things come.</i>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Through the beech</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The winds go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With gentle speech,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Long and slow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The grass is fine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And soft to lie in:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sun doth shine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The blue sky in:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<i>Heart, be alive;</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<i>Let the new things thrive.</i>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Round again!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Here art thou,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A rimy fruit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">On a bare bough!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Winter comes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Winter and snow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And a weary sighing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">To fall and go!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<i>Heart, thy hour shall be;</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<i>Thy dead will comfort thee.</i>
					</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-im-a-puir-man-i-grant" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Triolet</h3>
					<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">I'm a Puir Man I Grant</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>I'm a puir man I grant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I am weel neiboured;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And nane shall me daunt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though a puir man, I grant;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I shall not want—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Lord is my Shepherd!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I'm a puir man I grant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I am weel neiboured!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-win-that-blaws" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Win' That Blaws</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Win' that blaws the simmer plaid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ower the hie hill's shoothers laid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Green wi' gerse, an' reid wi' heather—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Welcome wi' yer sowl-like weather!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mony a win' there has been sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oot aneth the firmament—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ilka ane its story has;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ilka ane began an' was;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ilka ane fell quaiet an' mute</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whan its angel wark was oot:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First gaed are oot throu the mirk</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whan the maker gan to work;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ower it gaed an' ower the sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An' the warl begud to be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mony are has come an' gane</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sin' the time there was but ane:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ane was grit an' strong, an' rent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rocks an' muntains as it went</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Afore the Lord, his trumpeter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Waukin up the prophet's ear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ane was like a stepping soun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I' the mulberry taps abune—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Them the Lord's ain steps did swing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Walkin on afore his king;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ane lay dune like scoldit pup</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At his feet, an' gatna up—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whan the word the Maister spak</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drave the wull-cat billows back;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ane gaed frae his lips, an' dang</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the yird the sodger thrang;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ane comes frae his hert to mine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ilka day to mak it fine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Breath o' God, eh! come an' blaw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Frae my hert ilk fog awa;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wauk me up an' mak me strang,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fill my hert wi' mony a sang,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Frae my lips again to stert</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fillin sails o' mony a hert,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blawin them ower seas dividin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the only place to bide in.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-why-do-the-houses-stand" epub:type="poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Song</h3>
					<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">Why Do the Houses Stand</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Why do the houses stand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When they that built them are gone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When remaineth even of one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That lived there and loved and planned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not a face, not an eye, not a hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Only here and there a bone?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why do the houses stand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When they who built them are gone?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Oft in the moonlighted land</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When the day is overblown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With happy memorial moan</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet ghosts in a loving band</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Roam through the houses that stand—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the builders are not gone.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-for-where-your-treasure-is-there-will-your-heart-be-also" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">For Where Your Treasure Is, There Will Your Heart Be Also</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">The miser lay on his lonely bed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Life's candle was burning dim.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His heart in an iron chest was hid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under heaps of gold and an iron lid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And whether it were alive or dead</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">It never troubled him.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Slowly out of his body he crept.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">He said, "I am just the same!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only I want my heart in my breast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will go and fetch it out of my chest!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through the dark a darker shadow he leapt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Saying "Hell is a fabled flame!"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">He opened the lid. Oh, Hell's own night!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">His ghost-eyes saw no gold!—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Empty and swept! Not a gleam was there!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In goes his hand, but the chest is bare!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ghost-fingers, aha! have only might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To close, not to clasp and hold!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">But his heart he saw, and he made a clutch</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">At the fungous puff-ball of sin:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eaten with moths, and fretted with rust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He grasped a handful of rotten dust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shrieked, as ghosts may, at the crumbling touch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But hid it his breast within.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">And some there are who see him sit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Under the church, apart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Counting out coins and coins of gold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heap by heap on the dank death-mould:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Alas poor ghost and his sore lack of wit—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">They breed in the dust of his heart!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Another miser has now his chest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And it hoards wealth more and more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like ferrets his hands go in and out,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Burrowing, tossing the gold about—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor heed the heart that, gone from his breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Is the cold heap's bloodless core.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Now wherein differ old ghosts that sit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Counting ghost-coins all day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the man who clings with spirit prone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To whatever can never be his own?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who will leave the world with not one whit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But a heart all eaten away?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-the-asthmatic-man-to-the-satan-that-binds-him" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Asthmatic Man to the Satan That Binds Him</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Satan, avaunt!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nay, take thine hour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou canst not daunt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou hast no power;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be welcome to thy nest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though it be in my breast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Burrow amain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dig like a mole;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fill every vein</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With half-burnt coal;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Puff the keen dust about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all to choke me out.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Fill music's ways</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With creaking cries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That no loud praise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May climb the skies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on my labouring chest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lay mountains of unrest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>My slumber steep</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In dreams of haste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That only sleep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No rest, I taste—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With stiflings, rimes of rote,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fingers on my throat.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Satan, thy might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I do defy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Live core of night</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I patient lie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wind comes up the gray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will blow thee clean away.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Christ's angel, Death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All radiant white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With one cold breath</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will scare thee quite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And give my lungs an air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As fresh as answered prayer.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So, Satan, do</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy worst with me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until the True</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall set me free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And end what he began,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By making me a man.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-a-song-of-hope" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">A Song of Hope</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I dinna ken what's come ower me!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There's a how whaur ance was a hert!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I never luik oot afore me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An' a cry winna gar me stert;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There's naething nae mair to come ower me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Blaw the win' frae ony airt!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For i' yon kirkyard there's a hillock,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A hert whaur ance was a how;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An' o' joy there's no left a mealock—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deid aiss whaur ance was a low!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For i' yon kirkyard, i' the hillock,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lies a seed 'at winna grow.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It's my hert 'at hauds up the wee hillie—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That's hoo there's a how i' my breist;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It's awa doon there wi' my Willie—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gaed wi' him whan he was releast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It's doon i' the green-grown hillie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But I s' be efter it neist!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Come awa, nicht an' mornin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Come ooks, years, a' Time's clan:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye're welcome: I'm no a bit scornin!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tak me til him as fest as ye can.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come awa, nicht an' mornin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ye are wings o' a michty span!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For I ken he's luikin an' waitin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Luikin aye doon as I clim;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An' I'll no hae him see me sit greitin</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I'stead o' gaein to him!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I'll step oot like ane sure o' a meetin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I'll travel an' rin to him.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-the-burnie" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Burnie</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The water ran doon frae the heich hope-heid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><i>Wi' a Rin, burnie, rin</i>;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It wimpled, an' waggled, an' sang a screed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O' nonsense, an' wadna blin</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><i>Wi' its Rin, burnie, rin</i>.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Frae the hert o' the warl, wi' a swirl an' a sway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><i>An' a Rin, burnie, rin</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That water lap clear frae the dark til the day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An' singin awa did spin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><i>Wi' its Rin, burnie, rin</i>.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ae wee bit mile frae the heich hope-heid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><i>Wi' its Rin, burnie, rin</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mang her yows an' her lammies the herd-lassie stude,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An' she loot a tear fa' in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><i>Wi' a Rin, burnie, rin</i>.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Frae the hert o' the maiden that tear-drap rase</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><i>Wi' a Rin, burnie, rin</i>;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wear'ly clim'in up weary ways</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There was but a drap to fa' in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sae laith did that burnie rin.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Twa wee bit miles frae the heich hope-heid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><i>Wi' its Rin, burnie, rin</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doon creepit a cowerin streakie o' reid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An' it meltit awa within</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The burnie 'at aye did rin.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Frae the hert o' a youth cam the tricklin reid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><i>Wi' its Rin, burnie, rin</i>;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It ran an' ran till it left him deid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An' syne it dried up i' the win':</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That burnie nae mair did rin.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whan the wimplin burn that frae three herts gaed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><i>Wi' a Rin, burnie, rin</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cam to the lip o' the sea sae braid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It curled an' groued wi' pain o' sin—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But it tuik that burnie in.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-lord-what-is-man" epub:type="poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Song-Sermon</h3>
					<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">Lord, What Is Man</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Lord, what is man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thou art mindful of him!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though in creation's van,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lord, what is man!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He wills less than he can,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lets his ideal scoff him!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lord, what is man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thou art mindful of him!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-shadows" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Shadows</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>All things are shadows of thee, Lord;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sun himself is but thy shade;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My spirit is the shadow of thy word,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A thing that thou hast said.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Diamonds are shadows of the sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They gleam as after him they hark:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My soul some arrows of thy light hath won.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And feebly fights the dark!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All knowledges are broken shades,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In gulfs of dark a scattered horde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Together rush the parted glory-grades—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, lo, thy garment, Lord!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>My soul, the shadow, still is light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because the shadow falls from thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I turn, dull candle, to the centre bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And home flit shadowy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Shine, Lord; shine me thy shadow still;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The brighter I, the more thy shade!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My motion be thy lovely moveless will!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My darkness, light delayed!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-a-winter-prayer" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">A Winter Prayer</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Come through the gloom of clouded skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The slow dim rain and fog athwart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through east winds keen with wrong and lies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Come and lift up my hopeless heart.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Come through the sickness and the pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sore unrest that tosses still;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through aching dark that hides the gain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Come and arouse my fainting will.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Come through the prate of foolish words,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The science with no God behind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through all the pangs of untuned chords</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Speak wisdom to my shaken mind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Through all the fears that spirits bow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of what hath been, or may befall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come down and talk with me, for thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Canst tell me all about them all.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Hear, hear my sad lone heart entreat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Heart of all joy, below, above!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come near and let me kiss thy feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And name the names of those I love!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-song-of-a-poor-pilgrim" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Song of a Poor Pilgrim</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Roses all the rosy way!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Roses to the rosier west</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where the roses of the day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cling to night's unrosy breast!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thou who mak'st the roses, why</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Give to every leaf a thorn?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On thy rosy highway I</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still am by thy roses torn!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Pardon! I will not mistake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These good thorns that make me fret!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Goads to urge me, stings to wake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For my freedom they are set.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yea, on one steep mountain-side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Climbing to a fancied fold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Roses grasped had let me slide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the thorns did keep their hold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Out of darkness light is born,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of weakness make me strong:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One glad day will every thorn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Break into a rose of song.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Though like sparrow sit thy bird</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lonely on the house-top dark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the rosy dawning stirred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Up will soar thy praising lark;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Roses, roses all his song!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Roses in a gorgeous feast!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Roses in a royal throng,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Surging, rosing from the east!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-an-evening-prayer" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">An Evening Prayer</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I am a bubble</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon thy ever-moving, resting sea:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh, rest me now from tossing, trespass, trouble!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Take me down into thee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Give me thy peace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My heart is aching with unquietness:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh, make its inharmonious beating cease!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy hand upon it press.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>My Night! my Day!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Swift night and day betwixt, my world doth reel:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Potter, take not thy hand from off the clay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That whirls upon thy wheel.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O Heart, I cry</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For love and life, pardon and hope and strength!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Father, I am thine; I shall not die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But I shall sleep at length!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-mercy-to-thee-o-lord-belongs" epub:type="poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Song-Sermon</h3>
					<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">Mercy to Thee, O Lord, Belongs</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Mercy to thee, O Lord, belongs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For as his work thou giv'st the man.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From us, not thee, come all our wrongs;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mercy to thee, O Lord, belongs:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With small-cord whips and scorpion thongs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou lay'st on every ill thy ban.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mercy to thee, O Lord, belongs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For as his work thou giv'st the man.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-a-dream-song" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">A Dream-Song</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The stars are spinning their threads,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the clouds are the dust that flies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the suns are weaving them up</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the day when the sleepers arise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The ocean in music rolls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The gems are turning to eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the trees are gathering souls</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the day when the sleepers arise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The weepers are learning to smile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And laughter to glean the sighs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hearts to bury their care and guile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the day when the sleepers arise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Oh, the dews and the moths and the daisy-red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The larks and the glimmers and flows!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lilies and sparrows and daily bread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the something that nobody knows!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-christmas-1880" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Christmas, 1880</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Great-hearted child, thy very being <i>The Son</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who know'st the hearts of all us prodigals;—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For who is prodigal but he who has gone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Far from the true to heart it with the false?—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, who but thou, that, from the animals',</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Know'st all the hearts, up to the Father's own,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Can tell what it would be to be alone!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Alone! No father!—At the very thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou, the eternal light, wast once aghast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A death in death for thee it almost wrought!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But thou didst haste, about to breathe thy last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And call'dst out <i>Father</i> ere thy spirit passed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Exhausted in fulfilling not any vow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But doing his will who greater is than thou.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That we might know him, thou didst come and live;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That we might find him, thou didst come and die;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The son-heart, brother, thy son-being give—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We too would love the father perfectly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to his bosom go back with the cry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Father, into thy hands I give the heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Which left thee but to learn how good thou art!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There are but two in all the universe—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The father and his children—not a third;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor, all the weary time, fell any curse!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not once dropped from its nest an unfledged bird</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But thou wast with it! Never sorrow stirred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But a love-pull it was upon the chain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">That draws the children to the father again!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O Jesus Christ, babe, man, eternal son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Take pity! we are poor where thou art rich:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our hearts are small; and yet there is not one</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In all thy father's noisy nursery which,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Merry, or mourning in its narrow niche,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Needs not thy father's heart, this very now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">With all his being's being, even as thou!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-i-do-not-know-thy-final-will" epub:type="poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Rondel</h3>
					<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">I Do Not Know Thy Final Will</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>I do not know thy final will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It is too good for me to know:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou willest that I mercy show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I take heed and do no ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I the needy warm and fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor stones at any sinner throw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I know not thy final will—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It is too good for me to know.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I know thy love unspeakable—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For love's sake able to send woe!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To find thine own thou lost didst go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wouldst for men thy blood yet spill!—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How should I know thy final will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Godwise too good for me to know!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-the-sparrow" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Sparrow</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>O Lord, I cannot but believe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The birds do sing thy praises then, when they sing to one another,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they are lying seed-sown land when the winter makes them grieve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their little bosoms breeding songs for the summer to unsmother!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>If thou hadst finished me, O Lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor left out of me part of that great gift that goes to singing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I sure had known the meaning high of the songster's praising word,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had known upon what thoughts of thee his pearly talk he was stringing!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I should have read the wisdom hid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the storm-inspired melody of thy thrush's bosom solemn:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I should not then have understood what thy free spirit did</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make the lark-soprano mount like to a geyser-column!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I think I almost understand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy owl, his muffled swiftness, moon-round eyes, and intoned hooting;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I think I could take up the part of a night-owl in the land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With yellow moon and starry things day-dreamers all confuting.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But 'mong thy creatures that do sing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps of all I likest am to the housetop-haunting sparrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That flies brief, sudden flights upon a dumpy, fluttering wing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And chirps thy praises from a throat that's very short and narrow.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But if thy sparrow praise thee well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By singing well thy song, nor letting noisy traffic quell it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It may be that, in some remote and leafy heavenly dell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He may with a trumpet-throat awake, and a trumpet-song to swell it!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-december-23-1879" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">December 23, 1879</h3>
				</header>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>A thousand houses of poesy stand around me everywhere;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They fill the earth and they fill my thought, they are in and above the</span>
						<br/>
						<span>air;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But to-night they have shut their doors, they have shut their shining</span>
						<br/>
						<span>windows fair,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And I am left in a desert world, with an aching as if of care.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Cannot I break some little nut and get at the poetry in it?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cannot I break the shining egg of some all but hatched heavenly linnet?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cannot I find some beauty-worm, and its moony cocoon-silk spin it?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cannot I find my all but lost day in the rich content of a minute?</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I will sit me down, all aching and tired, in the midst of this</span>
						<br/>
						<span>never-unclosing</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of door or window that makes it look as if truth herself were dozing;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I will sit me down and make me a tent, call it poetizing or prosing,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of what may be lying within my reach, things at my poor disposing!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Now what is nearest?—My conscious self. Here I sit quiet and say:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>"Lo, I myself am already a house of poetry solemn and gay!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But, alas, the windows are shut, all shut: 'tis a cold and foggy day,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And I have not now the light to see what is in me the same alway!"</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Nay, rather I'll say: "I am a nut in the hard and frozen ground;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Above is the damp and frozen air, the cold blue sky all round;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And the power of a leafy and branchy tree is in me crushed and bound</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till the summer come and set it free from the grave-clothes</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">in which it is wound!"</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>But I bethink me of something better!—something better, yea best!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>"I am lying a voiceless, featherless thing in God's own perfect nest;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And the voice and the song are growing within me, slowly lifting my</span>
						<br/>
						<span>breast;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And his wide night-wings are closed about me, for his sun is down in the</span>
						<br/>
						<span>west!"</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Doors and windows, tents and grave-clothes, winters and eggs and seeds,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ye shall all be opened and broken and torn; ye are but to serve my needs!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On the will of the Father all lovely things are strung like a string of</span>
						<br/>
						<span>beads</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For his heart to give the obedient child that the will of the father</span>
						<br/>
						<span>heeds.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-song-prayer" epub:type="poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Song-Prayer</h3>
					<p epub:type="subtitle">After King David</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>I shall be satisfied</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the seeing of thy face.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I awake, wide-eyed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shall be satisfied</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With what this life did hide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The one supernal grace!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shall be satisfied</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the seeing of thy face.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-december-27-1879" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">December 27, 1879</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Every time would have its song</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If the heart were right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seeing Love all tender-strong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fills the day and night.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Weary drop the hands of Prayer</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Calling out for peace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love always and everywhere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sings and does not cease.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Fear, the caitiff, through the night</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Silent peers about;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love comes singing with a light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And doth cast him out.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Hate and Guile and Wrath and Doubt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Never try to sing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If they did, oh, what a rout</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Anguished ears would sting!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Pride indeed will sometimes aim</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At the finer speech,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the best that he can frame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is a peacock-screech.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Greed will also sometimes try:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Happiness he hunts!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But his dwelling is a sty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his tones are grunts.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Faith will sometimes raise a song</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soaring up to heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then she will be silent long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And will weep at even.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Hope has many a gladsome note</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now and then to pipe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, alas, he has the throat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of a bird unripe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Often Joy a stave will start</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which the welkin rends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But it always breaks athwart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And untimely ends.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Grief, who still for death doth long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Always self-abhorred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has but one low, troubled song,</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>I am sorry, Lord</i>.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Love singeth in the vault.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Singeth on the stair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even for Sorrow will not halt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Singeth everywhere.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For the great Love everywhere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Over all doth glow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Draws his birds up trough the air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tends his birds below.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And with songs ascending sheer</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Love-born Love replies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Singing <i>Father</i> in his ear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where she bleeding lies.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therefore, if my heart were right</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I should sing out clear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sing aloud both day and night</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Every month in the year!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-sunday-december-28-1879" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Sunday, December 28, 1879</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A dim, vague shrinking haunts my soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My spirit bodeth ill—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As some far-off restraining bank</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had burst, and waters, many a rank,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were marching on my hill;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As if I had no fire within</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For thoughts to sit about;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if I had no flax to spin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No lamp to lure the good things in</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And keep the bad things out.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The wind, south-west, raves in the pines</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That guard my cottage round;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sea-waves fall in stormy lines</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Below the sandy cliffs and chines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And swell the roaring sound.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The misty air, the bellowing wind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not often trouble me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The storm that's outside of the mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth oftener wake my heart to find</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More peace and liberty.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Why is not such my fate to-night?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Chance is not lord of things!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Man were indeed a hapless wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Things, thoughts occurring as they might—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Chaotic wallowings!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The man of moods might merely say</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As by the fire he sat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"I am low spirited to-day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I must do something, work or play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lest care should kill the cat!"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Not such my saw: I was not meant</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be the sport of things!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mood has meaning and intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And my dull heart is humbly bent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To have the truth it brings.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This sense of needed shelter round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This frequent mental start</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Show what a poor life mine were found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To what a dead self I were bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How feeble were my heart,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>If I who think did stand alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Centre to what I thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A brain within a box of bone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A king on a deserted throne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A something that was nought!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A being without power to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or any power to cease;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom objects but compelled to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose trouble was a windblown sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A windless sea his peace!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This very sadness makes me think</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How readily I might</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be driven to reason's farthest brink,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then over it, and sudden sink</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In ghastly waves of night.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It makes me know when I am glad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">'Tis thy strength makes me strong;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But for thy bliss I should be sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But for thy reason should be mad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But for thy right be wrong.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Around me spreads no empty waste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No lordless host of things;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My restlessness but seeks thy rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My little good doth seek thy best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My needs thy ministerings.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>'Tis this, this only makes me safe—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I am, immediate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of one that lives; I am no waif</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That haggard waters toss and chafe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But of a royal fate,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The born-child of a Power that lives</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because it will and can,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Love whose slightest motion gives,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Freedom that forever strives</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To liberate his Man.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I live not on the circling air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Live not by daily food;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I live not even by thinkings fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I hold my very being there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where God is pondering good.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Because God lives I live; because</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He thinks, I also think;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am dependent on no laws</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But on himself, and without pause;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Between us hangs no link.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The man that lives he knows not how</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May well fear any mouse!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I should be trembling this same now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If I did think, my Father, thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wast nowhere in the house!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O Father, lift me on thine arm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hold me close to thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lift me into thy breathing warm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then cast me, and I fear no harm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into creation's sea!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-in-his-arms-thy-silly-lamb" epub:type="poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Song-Sermon</h3>
					<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">In His Arms Thy Silly Lamb</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>In his arms thy silly lamb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, he gathers to his breast!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>See, thou sadly bleating dam,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>See him lift thy silly lamb!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hear it cry, "How blest I am!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here is love, and love is rest!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In his arms thy silly lamb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>See him gather to his breast!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-the-donkey-in-the-cart-to-the-horse-in-the-carriage" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Donkey in the Cart to the Horse in the Carriage</h3>
				</header>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I say! hey! cousin there! I mustn't call you brother!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet you have a tail behind, and I have another!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You pull, and I pull, though we don't pull together:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You have less hardship, and I have more weather!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Your legs are long, mine are short; I am lean, you are fatter;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your step is bold and free, mine goes pitter-patter;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your head is in the air, and mine hangs down like lead—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But then my two great ears are so heavy on my head!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>You need not whisk your stump, nor turn away your nose;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Poor donkeys ain't so stupid as rich horses may suppose!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I could feed in any manger just as well as you,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though I don't despise a thistle—with sauce of dust and dew!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>T'other day a bishop's cob stopped before me in a lane,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With a tail as broad as oil-cake, and a close-clipped hoggy mane;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I stood sideways to the hedge, but he did not want to pass,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And he was so full of corn he didn't care about the grass.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Quoth the cob, "You are a donkey of a most peculiar breed!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You've just eaten up a thistle that was going fast to seed!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If you had but let it be, you might have raised a crop!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To many a coming dinner you have put a sad stop!"</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I told him I was hungry, and to leave one of ten</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Would have spoiled my best dinner, the one I wanted then.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Said the cob, "<i>I</i> ought to know the truth about dinners,</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>I</i> don't eat on roadsides like poor tramping sinners!"</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>"Why don't you take it easy? You are working much too hard!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In the shafts you'll die one day, if you're not upon your guard!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Have pity on your friends: work seems to you delectable,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But believe me such a cart—excuse me—'s not respectable!"</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I told him I must trot in the shafts where I was put,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor look round at the cart, but set foremost my best foot;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It <i>was</i> rather rickety, and the axle wanted oil,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But I always slept at night with the deep sleep of toil!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>"All very fine," he said, "to wag your ears and parley,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And pretend you quite despise my bellyfuls of barley!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But with blows and with starving, and with labour over-hard,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By spurs! a week will see you in the knacker's yard."</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I thanked him for his counsel, and said I thought I'd take it, really,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If he'd spare me half a feed out of four feeds daily.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He tossed his head at that: "Now don't be cheeky!" said he;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>"When I find I'm getting fat, I'll think of you: keep steady."</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>"Good-bye!" I said—and say, for you are such another!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Why, now I look at you, I see you are his brother!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yes, thank you for your kick: 'twas all that you could spare,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For, sure, they clip and singe you very, very bare!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>My cart it is upsets you! but in that cart behind</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There's no dirt or rubbish, no bags of gold or wind!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There's potatoes there, and wine, and corn, and mustard-seed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And a good can of milk, and some honey too, indeed!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Few blows I get, some hay, and of water many a draught:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I tell you he's no coster that sits upon my shaft!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And for the knacker's yard—that's not my destined bed:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No donkey ever yet saw himself there lying dead.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-room-to-roam" epub:type="poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Room to Roam</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Strait is the path? He means we must not roam?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yes; but the strait path leads into a boundless home.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-cottage-songs">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Cottage Songs</h3>
				</header>
				<section id="a-threefold-cord-cottage-songs-1">
					<hgroup>
						<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h4>
						<p epub:type="title">By the Cradle</p>
					</hgroup>
					<p>
						<span>Close her eyes: she must not peep!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Let her little puds go slack;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Slide away far into sleep:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sis will watch till she comes back!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Mother's knitting at the door,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Waiting till the kettle sings;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When the kettle's song is o'er</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She will set the bright tea-things.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Father's busy making hay</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In the meadow by the brook,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not so very far away—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Close its peeps, it needn't look!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>God is round us everywhere—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sees the scythe glitter and rip;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Watches baby gone somewhere;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sees how mother's fingers skip!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Sleep, dear baby; sleep outright:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Mother's sitting just behind:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Father's only out of sight;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">God is round us like the wind.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-threefold-cord-cottage-songs-2">
					<hgroup>
						<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h4>
						<p epub:type="title">Sweeping the Floor</p>
					</hgroup>
					<p>
						<span>Sweep and sweep and sweep the floor,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Sweep the dust, pick up the pin;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Make it clean from fire to door,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Clean for father to come in!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Mother said that God goes sweeping,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Looking, sweeping with a broom,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All the time that we are sleeping,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">For a shilling in the room:</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Did he drop it out of glory,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Walking far above the birds?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or did parson make the story</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">For the thinking afterwards?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>If I were the swept-for shilling</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">I would hearken through the gloom;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Roll out fast, and fall down willing</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Right before the sweeping broom!</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-threefold-cord-cottage-songs-3">
					<hgroup>
						<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h4>
						<p epub:type="title">Washing the Clothes</p>
					</hgroup>
					<p>
						<span>This is the way we wash the clo'es</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Free from dirt and smoke and clay!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Through and through the water flows,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Carries Ugly right away!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>This is the way we bleach the clo'es:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Lay them out upon the green;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Through and through the sunshine goes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Makes them white as well as clean!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>This is the way we dry the clo'es:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Hang them on the bushes about;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Through and through the soft wind blows,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Draws and drives the wetness out!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Water, sun, and windy air</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Make the clothes clean, white, and sweet</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lay them now in lavender</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">For the Sunday, folded neat!</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-threefold-cord-cottage-songs-4">
					<hgroup>
						<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h4>
						<p epub:type="title">Drawing Water</p>
					</hgroup>
					<p>
						<span>Dark, as if it would not tell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Lies the water, still and cool:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dip the bucket in the well,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Lift it from the precious pool!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Up it comes all brown and dim,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Telling of the twilight sweet:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As it rises to the brim</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">See the sun and water meet!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>See the friends each other hail!</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">"Here you are!" cries Master Sun;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mistress Water from the pail</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Flashes back, alive with fun!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Have you not a tale to tell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Water, as I take you home?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tell me of the hidden well</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Whence you, first of all, did come.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Of it you have kept some flavour</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Through long paths of darkling strife:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Water all has still a savour</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of the primal well of life!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Could you show the lovely way</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Back and up through sea and sky</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To that well? Oh, happy day,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">I would drink, and never die!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Jesus sits there on its brink</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">All the world's great thirst to slake,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Offering every one to drink</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Who will only come and take!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Lord of wells and waters all,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Lord of rains and dewy beads,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unto thee my thirst doth call</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">For the thing thou know'st it needs!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Come home, water sweet and cool,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Gift of God thou always art!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Spring up, Well more beautiful,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Rise in mine straight from his heart.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-threefold-cord-cottage-songs-5">
					<hgroup>
						<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h4>
						<p epub:type="title">Cleaning the Windows</p>
					</hgroup>
					<p>
						<span>Wash the window; rub it dry;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Make the ray-door clean and bright:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He who lords it in the sky</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Loves on cottage floors to light!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Looking over sea and beck,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Mountain-forest, orchard-bloom,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He can spy the smallest speck</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Anywhere about the room!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>See how bright his torch is blazing</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">In the heart of mother's store!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Strange! I never saw him gazing</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">So into that press before!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Ah, I see!—the wooden pane</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">In the window, dull and dead,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Father called its loss a gain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And a glass one put instead!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>What a difference it makes!</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">How it melts the filmy gloom!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What a little more it takes</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Much to brighten up a room!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>There I spy a dusty streak!</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">There a corner not quite clean!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There a cobweb! There the sneak</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of a spider, watching keen!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Lord of suns, and eyes that see,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Shine into me, see and show;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Leave no darksome spot in me</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Where thou dost not shining go.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Fill my spirit full of eyes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Doors of light in every part;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Open windows to the skies</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That no moth corrupt my heart.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-the-wind-and-the-moon">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Wind and the Moon</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Said the Wind to the Moon, "I will blow you out!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">You stare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">In the air</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">As if crying <i>Beware</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Always looking what I am about:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I hate to be watched; I will blow you out!"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Wind blew hard, and out went the Moon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">So, deep</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">On a heap</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Of clouds, to sleep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down lay the Wind, and slumbered soon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Muttering low, "I've done for that Moon!"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He turned in his bed: she was there again!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">On high</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">In the sky</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">With her one ghost-eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Moon shone white and alive and plain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said the Wind, "I will blow you out again!"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Wind blew hard, and the Moon grew slim.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">"With my sledge</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">And my wedge</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">I have knocked off her edge!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will blow," said the Wind, "right fierce and grim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the creature will soon be slimmer than slim!"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He blew and he blew, and she thinned to a thread.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">"One puff</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">More's enough</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">To blow her to snuff!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One good puff more where the last was bred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And glimmer, glimmer, glum will go that thread!"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He blew a great blast, and the thread was gone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">In the air</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Nowhere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Was a moonbeam bare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Larger and nearer the shy stars shone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sure and certain the Moon was gone!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Wind he took to his revels once more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">On down</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">And in town,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A merry-mad clown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He leaped and holloed with whistle and roar—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When there was that glimmering thread once more!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He flew in a rage—he danced and blew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">But in vain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Was the pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Of his bursting brain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For still the Moon-scrap the broader grew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The more that he swelled his big cheeks and blew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Slowly she grew—till she filled the night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">And shone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">On her throne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">In the sky alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A matchless, wonderful, silvery light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Radiant and lovely, the queen of the night.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Said the Wind, "What a marvel of power am I!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">With my breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">In good faith,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">I blew her to death!—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First blew her away right out of the sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then blew her in: what a strength am I!"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But the Moon she knew nought of the silly affair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">For, high</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">In the sky</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">With her one white eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Motionless miles above the air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She never had heard the great Wind blare.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-the-foolish-harebell">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Foolish Harebell</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A harebell hung her wilful head:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"I am tired, so tired! I wish I was dead."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She hung her head in the mossy dell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"If all were over, then all were well!"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Wind he heard, and was pitiful,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And waved her about to make her cool.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Wind, you are rough!" said the dainty Bell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Leave me alone—I am not well."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Wind, at the word of the drooping dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sighed to himself and ceased in shame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"I am hot, so hot!" she moaned and said;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"I am withering up; I wish I was dead!"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then the Sun he pitied her woeful case,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And drew a thick veil over his face.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Cloud go away, and don't be rude,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She said; "I do not see why you should!"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Cloud withdrew. Then the Harebell cried,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"I am faint, so faint!—and no water beside!"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Dew came down its millionfold path:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She murmured, "I did not want a bath!"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Dew went up; the Wind softly crept;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Night came down, and the Harebell slept.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A boy ran past in the morning gray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Plucked the Harebell, and threw her away.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Harebell shivered, and sighed, "Oh! oh!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am faint indeed! Come, dear Wind, blow."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Wind blew gently, and did not speak.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She thanked him kindly, but grew more weak.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Sun, dear Sun, I am cold!" she said.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He shone; but lower she drooped her head.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"O Rain, I am withering! all the blue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is fading out of me!—come, please do!"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Rain came down as fast as he could,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But for all his good will he could do her no good.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She shuddered and shrivelled, and moaning said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Thank you all kindly!" and then she was dead.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Let us hope, let us hope when she comes next year</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She'll be simple and sweet! But I fear, I fear!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-i-was-very-cold">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Song</h3>
					<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">I Was Very Cold</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>I was very cold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the summer weather;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sun shone all his gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I was very cold—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas, we were grown old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Love and I together!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh, but I was cold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the summer weather!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Sudden I grew warmer</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though the brooks were frozen:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Truly, scorn did harm her!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I said, and I grew warmer;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Better men the charmer</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Knows at least a dozen!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I said, and I grew warmer</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though the brooks were frozen.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Spring sits on her nest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Daisies and white clover;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And my heart at rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lies in the spring's young nest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My love she loves me best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the frost is over!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spring sits on her nest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Daisies and white clover!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-an-improvisation">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">An Improvisation</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The stars cleave the sky.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet for us they rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And their race-course high</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is a shining nest!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The hours hurry on.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But where is thy flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soft pavilion</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of motionless night?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Earth gives up her trees</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To the holy air;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They live in the breeze;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They are saints at prayer!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Summer night, come from God,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On your beauty, I see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A still wave has flowed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of eternity!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-equity">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Equity</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>No bird can sing in tune but that the Lord</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sits throned in equity above the heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And holds the righteous balance always even;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No heart can true response to love afford</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherein from one to eight not every chord</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is yet attuned by the spirits seven:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For tuneful no bird sings but that the Lord</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is throned in equity above high heaven.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Oh heart, by wrong unfilial scathed and scored,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from thy humble throne with mazedness driven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Take courage: when thy wrongs thou hast forgiven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy rights in love thy God will see restored:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No bird could sing in tune but that the Lord</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sits throned in equity above the heaven.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-the-consoler">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Consoler</h3>
					<p epub:type="subtitle">On an Engraving of Scheffer's <i>Christus Consolator</i></p>
				</hgroup>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>What human form is this? what form divine?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And who are these that gaze upon his face</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mild, beautiful, and full of heavenly grace,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With whose reflected light the gazers shine?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Saviour, who does not know it to be thine?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who does not long to fill a gazer's place?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And yet there is no time, there is no space</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To keep away thy servants from thy shrine!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Here if we kneel, and watch with faithful eyes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou art not too far for faithful eyes to see,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou art not too far to turn and look on me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To speak to me, and to receive my sighs.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Therefore for ever I forget the skies,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And find an everlasting Sun in thee.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Oh let us never leave that happy throng!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From that low attitude of love not cease!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In all the world there is no other peace,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In all the world no other shield from wrong.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But chiefly, Saviour, for thy feet we long—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For no vain quiet, for no pride's increase—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But that, being weak, and Thou divinely strong,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Us from our hateful selves thou mayst release.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We wander from thy fold's free holy air,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Forget thy looks, and take our fill of sin!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But if thou keep us evermore within,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We never surely can forget thee there—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Breathing thy breath, thy white robe given to wear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And loving thee for all thou diedst to win!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div>
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>To speak of him in language of our own,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is not for us too daringly to try;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But, Saviour, we can read thy history</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon the faces round thy humble throne;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And as the flower among the grass makes known</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What summer suns have warmed it from the sky,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As every human smile and human sigh</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is witness that we do not live alone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So in that company—in those sweet tears,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The first-born of a rugged melted heart,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In those gaunt chains for ever torn apart,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And in the words that weeping mother hears,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We read the story of two thousand years,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And know thee somewhat, Saviour, as thou art.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-to">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">To ⸻</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I cannot write old verses here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dead things a thousand years away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When all the life of the young year</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is in the summer day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The roses make the world so sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bees, the birds have such a tune,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There's such a light and such a heat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And such a joy this June,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>One must expand one's heart with praise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And make the memory secure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of sunshine and the woodland days</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And summer twilights pure.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Oh listen rather! Nature's song</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Comes from the waters, beating tides,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Green-margined rivers, and the throng</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of streams on mountain-sides.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So fair those water-spirits are,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such happy strength their music fills,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our joy shall be to wander far</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And find them on the hills.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-to-a-sister">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">To a Sister</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A fresh young voice that sings to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So often many a simple thing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should surely not unanswered be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By all that I can sing.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Dear voice, be happy every way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thousand changing tones among,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From little child's unfinished lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To angel's perfect song.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In dewy woods—fair, soft, and green</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like morning woods are childhood's bower—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be like the voice of brook unseen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the stones and flowers;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A joyful voice though born so low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And making all its neighbours glad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet, hidden, constant in its flow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even when the winds are sad.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So, strengthen in a peaceful home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And daily deeper meanings bear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when life's wildernesses come</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be brave and faithful there.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Try all the glorious magic range,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Worship, forgive, console, rejoice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until the last and sweetest change—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So live and grow, dear voice.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-contrition">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Contrition</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Out of the gulf into the glory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Father, my soul cries out to be lifted.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dark is the woof of my dismal story,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thorough thy sun-warp stormily drifted!—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of the gulf into the glory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lift me, and save my story.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I have done many things merely shameful;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I am a man ashamed, my father!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My life is ashamed and broken and blameful—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The broken and blameful, oh, cleanse and gather!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heartily shame me, Lord, of the shameful!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To my judge I flee with my blameful.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Saviour, at peace in thy perfect purity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Think what it is, not to be pure!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strong in thy love's essential security,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Think upon those who are never secure.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full fill my soul with the light of thy purity:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fold me in love's security.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O Father, O Brother, my heart is sore aching!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Help it to ache as much as is needful;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is it you cleansing me, mending, remaking,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dear potter-hands, so tender and heedful?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sick of my past, of my own self aching—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hurt on, dear hands, with your making.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Proud of the form thou hadst given thy vessel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proud of myself, I forgot my donor;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down in the dust I began to nestle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Poured thee no wine, and drank deep of dishonour!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lord, thou hast broken, thou mendest thy vessel!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the dust of thy glory I nestle.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-threefold-cord-the-shortest-and-sweetest-of-songs">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Shortest and Sweetest of Songs</h3>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Come</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Home.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</article>
		<article id="russell-gurney" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Russell Gurney</h2>
<p>  In that high country whither thou art gone,<br/>

  Right noble friend, thou walkest with thy peers,<br/>

  The gathered great of many a hundred years!<br/>

  Few are left like thee—few, I say, not none,<br/>

  Else were thy England soon a Babylon,<br/>

  A land of outcry, mockery, and tears!<br/>

  Higher than law, a refuge from its fears,<br/>

  Wast thou, in whom embodied Justice shone.<br/>

  The smile that gracious broke on thy grand face<br/>

  Was like the sunrise of a morn serene<br/>

  Among the mountains, making sweet their awe.<br/>

  Thou both the gentle and the strong didst draw;<br/>

  Thee childhood loved, and on thy breast would lean,<br/>

  As, whence thou cam'st, it knew the lofty place.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-one-threatened-with-blindness" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To One Threatened with Blindness</h2>
<h4>  I.</h4>

<p>  Lawrence, what though the world be growing dark,<br/>

  And twilight cool thy potent day inclose!<br/>

  The sun, beneath the round earth sunk, still glows<br/>

  All the night through, sleepless and young and stark.<br/>

  Oh, be thy spirit faithful as the lark,<br/>

  More daring: in the midnight of thy woes,<br/>

  Dart through them, higher than earth's shadow goes,<br/>

  Into the Light of which thou art a spark!<br/>

  Be willing to be blind—that, in thy night,<br/>

  The Lord may bring his Father to thy door,<br/>

  And enter in, and feast thy soul with light.<br/>

  Then shall thou dream of darksome ways no more,<br/>

  Forget the gloom that round thy windows lies,<br/>

  And shine, God's house, all radiant in our eyes.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  II.</h4>

<p>  Say thou, his will be done who is the good!<br/>

  His will be borne who knoweth how to bear!<br/>

  Who also in the night had need of prayer,<br/>

  Both when awoke divinely longing mood,<br/>

  And when the power of darkness him withstood.<br/>

  For what is coming take no jot of care:<br/>

  Behind, before, around thee as the air,<br/>

  He o'er thee like thy mother's heart will brood.<br/>

  And when thou hast wearied thy wings of prayer,<br/>

  Then fold them, and drop gently to thy nest,<br/>

  Which is thy faith; and make thy people blest<br/>

  With what thou bring'st from that ethereal height,<br/>

  Which whoso looks on thee will straightway share:<br/>

  He needs no eyes who is a shining light!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-aubrey-de-vere" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To Aubrey de Vere</h2>
<p>  Ray of the Dawn of Truth, Aubrey de Vere,<br/>

  Forgive my play fantastic with thy name,<br/>

  Distilling its true essence by the flame<br/>

  Which Love 'neath Fancy's limbeck lighteth clear.<br/>

  I know not what thy semblance, what thy cheer;<br/>

  If, as thy spirit, hale thy bodily frame,<br/>

  Or furthering by failure each high aim;<br/>

  If green thy leaf, or, like mine, growing sear;<br/>

  But this I think, that thou wilt, by and by—<br/>

  Two journeys stoutly, therefore safely trod—<br/>

  We laying down the staff, and He the rod—<br/>

  So look on me I shall not need to cry—<br/>

  "We must be brothers, Aubrey, thou and I:<br/>

  We mean the same thing—will the will of God!"<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="general-gordon" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">General Gordon</h2>
<h4>  I.</h4>

<p>  Victorious through failure! faithful Lord,<br/>

  Who for twelve angel legions wouldst not pray<br/>

  From thine own country of eternal day,<br/>

  To shield thee from the lanterned traitor horde,<br/>

  Making thy one rash servant sheathe his sword!—<br/>

  Our long retarded legions, on their way,<br/>

  Toiling through sands, and shouldering Nile's down-sway,<br/>

  To reach thy soldier, keeping at thy word,<br/>

  Thou sawest foiled—but glorifiedst him,<br/>

  Over ten cities giving him thy rule!<br/>

  We will not mourn a star that grew not dim,<br/>

  A soldier-child of God gone home from school!<br/>

  A dregless cup, with life brimmed, he did quaff,<br/>

  And quaffs it now with Christ's imperial staff!<br/>
</p>

<h4>  II.</h4>

<p>  Another to the witnesses' roll-call<br/>

  Hath answered, "Here I am!" and so stept out—<br/>

  With willingness crowned everywhere about,<br/>

  Not the head only, but the body all,<br/>

  In one great nimbus of obedient fall,<br/>

  His heart's blood dashing in the face of doubt—<br/>

  Love's last victorious stand amid the rout!<br/>

  —Silence is left, and the untasted gall.<br/>

  No chariot with ramping steeds of fire<br/>

  The Father sent to fetch his man-child home;<br/>

  His brother only called, "My Gordon, come!"<br/>

  And like a dove to heaven he did aspire,<br/>

  His one wing Death, his other, Heart's-desire.<br/>

  —Farewell a while! we climb where thou hast clomb!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="written-for-one-in-sore-pain" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Written for One in Sore Pain</h2>
<p>  Shepherd, on before thy sheep,<br/>

      Hear thy lamb that bleats behind!<br/>

  Scarce the track I stumbling keep!<br/>

      Through my thin fleece blows the wind!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Turn and see me, Son of Man!<br/>

      Turn and lift thy Father's child;<br/>

  Scarce I walk where once I ran:<br/>

      Carry me—the wind is wild!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Thou art strong—thy strength wilt share;<br/>

      My poor weight thou wilt not feel;<br/>

  Weakness made thee strong to bear,<br/>

      Suffering made thee strong to heal!<br/>
</p>

<p>  I were still a wandering sheep<br/>

      But for thee, O Shepherd-man!<br/>

  Following now, I faint, I weep,<br/>

      Yet I follow as I can!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Shepherd, if I fall and lie<br/>

      Moaning in the frosty wind,<br/>

  Yet, I know, I shall not die—<br/>

      Thou wilt miss me—and wilt find!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="christmas-1873" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Christmas, 1873</h2>
<p>  Christmas-Days are still in store:—<br/>

      Will they change—steal faded hither?<br/>

  Or come fresh as heretofore,<br/>

      Summering all our winter weather?<br/>
</p>

<p>  Surely they will keep their bloom<br/>

      All the countless pacing ages:<br/>

  In the country whence they come<br/>

      Children only are the sages!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Hither, every hour and year,<br/>

      Children come to cure our oldness—<br/>

  Oft, alas, to gather sear<br/>

      Unbelief, and earthy boldness!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Men they grow and women cold,<br/>

      Selfish, passionate, and plaining!<br/>

  Ever faster they grow old:—<br/>

      On the world, ah, eld is gaining!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Child, whose childhood ne'er departs!<br/>

      Jesus, with the perfect father!<br/>

  Drive the age from parents' hearts;<br/>

      To thy heart the children gather.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Send thy birth into our souls,<br/>

      With its grand and tender story.<br/>

  Hark! the gracious thunder rolls!—<br/>

      News to men! to God old glory!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="christmas-1884" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Christmas, 1884</h2>
<p>  Though in my heart no Christmas glee,<br/>

      Though my song-bird be dumb,<br/>

  Jesus, it is enough for me<br/>

      That thou art come.<br/>
</p>

<p>  What though the loved be scattered far,<br/>

      Few at the board appear,<br/>

  In thee, O Lord, they gathered are,<br/>

      And thou art here.<br/>
</p>

<p>  And if our hearts be low with lack,<br/>

      They are not therefore numb;<br/>

  Not always will thy day come back—<br/>

      Thyself will come!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-song-for-christmas" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Song for Christmas</h2>
<p>  Hark, in the steeple the dull bell swinging<br/>

      Over the furrows ill ploughed by Death!<br/>

  Hark the bird-babble, the loud lark singing!<br/>

      Hark, from the sky, what the prophet saith!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Hark, in the pines, the free Wind, complaining—<br/>

      Moaning, and murmuring, "Life is bare!"<br/>

  Hark, in the organ, the caught Wind, outstraining,<br/>

      Jubilant rise in a soaring prayer!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Toll for the burying, sexton tolling!<br/>

      Sing for the second birth, angel Lark!<br/>

  Moan, ye poor Pines, with the Past condoling!<br/>

      Burst out, brave Organ, and kill the Dark!<br/>
</p>

<h4>II.</h4>

<p>  Sit on the ground, and immure thy sorrow;<br/>

      I will give freedom to mine in song!<br/>

  Haunt thou the tomb, and deny the morrow;<br/>

      I will go watch in the dawning long!<br/>
</p>

<p>  For I shall see them, and know their faces—<br/>

      Tenderer, sweeter, and shining more;<br/>

  Clasp the old self in the new embraces;<br/>

      Gaze through their eyes' wide open door.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Loved ones, I come to you: see my sadness;<br/>

      I am ashamed—but you pardon wrong!<br/>

  Smile the old smile, and my soul's new gladness<br/>

      Straight will arise in sorrow and song!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-my-aging-friends" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To My Aging Friends</h2>
<p>  It is no winter night comes down<br/>

      Upon our hearts, dear friends of old;<br/>

  But a May evening, softly brown,<br/>

      Whose wind is rather cold.<br/>
</p>

<p>  We are not, like yon sad-eyed West,<br/>

      Phantoms that brood o'er Time's dust-hoard,<br/>

  We are like yon Moon—in mourning drest,<br/>

      But gazing on her lord.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Come nearer to the hearth, sweet friends,<br/>

      Draw nigher, closer, hand and chair;<br/>

  Ours is a love that never ends,<br/>

      For God is dearest there!<br/>
</p>

<p>  We will not talk about the past,<br/>

      We will not ponder ancient pain;<br/>

  Those are but deep foundations cast<br/>

      For peaks of soaring gain!<br/>
</p>

<p>  We, waiting Dead, will warm our bones<br/>

      At our poor smouldering earthly fire;<br/>

  And talk of wide-eyed living ones<br/>

      Who have what we desire.<br/>
</p>

<p>  O Living, ye know what is death—<br/>

      We, by and by, shall know it too!<br/>

  Humble, with bated, hoping breath,<br/>

      We are coming fast to you!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="christmas-song-of-the-old-children" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Christmas Song of the Old Children</h2>
<p>  Well for youth to seek the strong,<br/>

      Beautiful, and brave!<br/>

  We, the old, who walk along<br/>

      Gently to the grave,<br/>

  Only pay our court to thee,<br/>

  Child of all Eternity!<br/>
</p>

<p>  We are old who once were young,<br/>

      And we grow more old;<br/>

  Songs we are that have been sung,<br/>

      Tales that have been told;<br/>

  Yellow leaves, wind-blown to thee,<br/>

  Childhood of Eternity!<br/>
</p>

<p>  If we come too sudden near,<br/>

      Lo, Earth's infant cries,<br/>

  For our faces wan and drear<br/>

      Have such withered eyes!<br/>

  Thou, Heaven's child, turn'st not away<br/>

  From the wrinkled ones who pray!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Smile upon us with thy mouth<br/>

      And thine eyes of grace;<br/>

  On our cold north breathe thy south.<br/>

      Thaw the frozen face:<br/>

  Childhood all from thee doth flow—<br/>

  Melt to song our age's snow.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Gray-haired children come in crowds,<br/>

      Thee, their Hope, to greet:<br/>

  Is it swaddling clothes or shrouds<br/>

      Hampering so our feet?<br/>

  Eldest child, the shadows gloom:<br/>

  Take the aged children home.<br/>
</p>

<p>  We have had enough of play,<br/>

      And the wood grows drear;<br/>

  Many who at break of day<br/>

      Companied us here—<br/>

  They have vanished out of sight,<br/>

  Gone and met the coming light!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Fair is this out-world of thine,<br/>

      But its nights are cold;<br/>

  And the sun that makes it fine<br/>

      Makes us soon so old!<br/>

  Long its shadows grow and dim—<br/>

  Father, take us back with him!<br/>
</p>

<p>1891.</p>
		</article>
		<article id="christmas-meditation" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Christmas Meditation</h2>
<p>  He who by a mother's love<br/>

      Made the wandering world his own,<br/>

  Every year comes from above,<br/>

      Comes the parted to atone,<br/>

      Binding Earth to the Father's throne.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Nay, thou comest every day!<br/>

      No, thou never didst depart!<br/>

  Never hour hast been away!<br/>

      Always with us, Lord, thou art,<br/>

      Binding, binding heart to heart!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-old-castle" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Old Castle</h2>
<p>  The brother knew well the castle old,<br/>

      Every closet, each outlook fair,<br/>

  Every turret and bartizan bold,<br/>

      Every chamber, garnished or bare.<br/>

      The brother was out in the heavenly air;<br/>

  Little ones lost the starry way,<br/>

      Wandered down the dungeon stair.<br/>

  The brother missed them, and on the clay<br/>

      Of the dungeon-floor he found them all.<br/>

      Up they jumped when they heard him call!<br/>

  He led the little ones into the day—<br/>

  Out and up to the sunshine gay,<br/>

      Up to the father's own door-sill—<br/>

        In at the father's own room door,<br/>

  There to be merry and work and play,<br/>

      There to come and go at their will,<br/>

        Good boys and girls to be lost no more!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="christmas-prayer" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Christmas Prayer</h2>
<p>  Cold my heart, and poor, and low,<br/>

      Like thy stable in the rock;<br/>

  Do not let it orphan go,<br/>

      It is of thy parent stock!<br/>

  Come thou in, and it will grow<br/>

      High and wide, a fane divine;<br/>

  Like the ruby it will glow,<br/>

      Like the diamond shine!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="song-of-the-innocents" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Song of the Innocents</h2>
<p>  Merry, merry we well may be,<br/>

  For Jesus Christ is come down to see:<br/>

  Long before, at the top of the stair,<br/>

  He set our angels a waiting there,<br/>

  Waiting hither and thither to fly,<br/>

  Tending the children of the sky,<br/>

  Lest they dash little feet against big stones,<br/>

  And tumble down and break little bones;<br/>

  For the path is rough, and we must not roam;<br/>

  We have learned to walk, and must follow him home!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="christmas-day-and-every-day" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Christmas Day and Every Day</h2>
<p>  Star high,<br/>

  Baby low:<br/>

  'Twixt the two<br/>

  Wise men go;<br/>

  Find the baby,<br/>

  Grasp the star—<br/>

  Heirs of all things<br/>

  Near and far!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="rondel" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Rondel</h2>
<p>  I follow, tottering, in the funeral train<br/>

  That bears my body to the welcoming grave.<br/>

  As those I mourn not, that entomb the brave,<br/>

  But smile as those that lay aside the vain;<br/>
</p>

<p>  To me it is a thing of poor disdain,<br/>

      A clod I would not give a sigh to save!<br/>

  I follow, careless, in the funeral train,<br/>

      My outworn raiment to the cleansing grave.<br/>
</p>

<p>  I follow to the grave with growing pain—<br/>

      Then sudden cry: Let Earth take what she gave!<br/>

      And turn in gladness from the yawning cave—<br/>

  Glad even for those whose tears yet flow amain:<br/>

  They also follow, in their funeral train,<br/>

      Outworn necessities to the welcoming grave!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-prayer-1" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Prayer</h2>
<p>  When I look back upon my life nigh spent,<br/>

      Nigh spent, although the stream as yet flows on,<br/>

  I more of follies than of sins repent,<br/>

      Less for offence than Love's shortcomings moan.<br/>

      With self, O Father, leave me not alone—<br/>

  Leave not with the beguiler the beguiled;<br/>

      Besmirched and ragged, Lord, take back thine own:<br/>

  A fool I bring thee to be made a child.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="home-from-the-wars" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Home from the Wars</h2>
<p>  A tattered soldier, gone the glow and gloss,<br/>

      With wounds half healed, and sorely trembling knee,<br/>

  Homeward I come, to claim no victory-cross:<br/>

      I only faced the foe, and did not flee.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="god-not-gift" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">God; Not Gift</h2>
<p>  Gray clouds my heaven have covered o'er;<br/>

      My sea ebbs fast, no more to flow;<br/>

  Ghastly and dry, my desert shore<br/>

      Parched, bare, unsightly things doth show.<br/>
</p>

<p>  'Tis thou, Lord, cloudest up my sky;<br/>

      Stillest the heart-throb of my sea;<br/>

  Tellest the sad wind not to sigh,<br/>

      Yea, life itself to wait for thee!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Lord, here I am, empty enough!<br/>

      My music but a soundless moan!<br/>

  Blind hope, of all my household stuff,<br/>

      Leaves me, blind hope, not quite alone!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Shall hope too go, that I may trust<br/>

      Purely in thee, and spite of all?<br/>

  Then turn my very heart to dust—<br/>

      On thee, on thee, I yet will call.<br/>
</p>

<p>  List! list! his wind among the pines<br/>

      Hark! hark! that rushing is his sea's!<br/>

  O Father, these are but thy signs!—<br/>

      For thee I hunger, not for these!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Not joy itself, though pure and high—<br/>

      No gift will do instead of thee!<br/>

  Let but my spirit know thee nigh,<br/>

      And all the world may sleep for me!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-any-friend" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To Any Friend</h2>
<p>  If I did seem to you no more<br/>

      Than to myself I seem,<br/>

  Not thus you would fling wide the door,<br/>

      And on the beggar beam!<br/>
</p>

<p>  You would not don your radiant best,<br/>

      Or dole me more than half!<br/>

  Poor palmer I, no angel guest;<br/>

      A shaking reed my staff!<br/>
</p>

<p>  At home, no rich fruit, hanging low,<br/>

      Have I for Love to pull;<br/>

  Only unripe things that must grow<br/>

      Till Autumn's maund be full!<br/>
</p>

<p>  But I forsake my niggard leas,<br/>

      My orchard, too late hoar,<br/>

  And wander over lands and seas<br/>

      To find the Father's door.<br/>
</p>

<p>  When I have reached the ancestral farm,<br/>

      Have clomb the steepy hill,<br/>

  And round me rests the Father's arm,<br/>

      Then think me what you will.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="winter-song" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Winter Song</h2>
<p>  They were parted then at last?<br/>

    Was it duty, or force, or fate?<br/>

  Or did a worldly blast<br/>

    Blow-to the meeting-gate?<br/>
</p>

<p>  An old, short story is this!<br/>

    A glance, a trembling, a sigh,<br/>

  A gaze in the eyes, a kiss—<br/>

    Why will it not go by!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="at-my-window-after-sunset" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">At My Window After Sunset</h2>
<p>  Heaven and the sea attend the dying day,<br/>

    And in their sadness overflow and blend—<br/>

  Faint gold, and windy blue, and green and gray:<br/>

    Far out amid them my pale soul I send.<br/>
</p>

<p>  For, as they mingle, so mix life and death;<br/>

    An hour draws near when my day too will die;<br/>

  Already I forecast unheaving breath,<br/>

    Eviction on the moorland of yon sky.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Coldly and sadly lone, unhoused, alone,<br/>

    Twixt wind-broke wave and heaven's uncaring space!<br/>

  At board and hearth from this time forth unknown!<br/>

    Refuge no more in wife or daughter's face!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Cold, cold and sad, lone as that desert sea!<br/>

    Sad, lonely, as that hopeless, patient sky!<br/>

  Forward I cannot go, nor backward flee!<br/>

    I am not dead; I live, and cannot die!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Where are ye, loved ones, hither come before?<br/>

    Did you fare thus when first ye came this way?<br/>

  Somewhere there must be yet another door!—<br/>

    A door in somewhere from this dreary gray!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Come walking over watery hill and glen,<br/>

    Or stoop your faces through yon cloud perplext;<br/>

  Come, any one of dearest, sacred ten,<br/>

    And bring me patient hoping for the next.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Maker of heaven and earth, father of me,<br/>

    My words are but a weak, fantastic moan!<br/>

  Were I a land-leaf drifting on the sea,<br/>

    Thou still wert with me; I were not alone!<br/>
</p>

<p>  I am in thee, O father, lord of sky,<br/>

    And lord of waves, and lord of human souls!<br/>

  In thee all precious ones to me more nigh<br/>

    Than if they rushing came in radiant shoals!<br/>
</p>

<p>  I shall not be alone although I die,<br/>

    And loved ones should delay their coming long;<br/>

  Though I saw round me nought but sea and sky,<br/>

    Bare sea and sky would wake a holy song.<br/>
</p>

<p>  They are thy garments; thou art near within,<br/>

    Father of fathers, friend-creating friend!<br/>

  Thou art for ever, therefore I begin;<br/>

    Thou lov'st, therefore my love shall never end!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Let loose thy giving, father, on thy child;<br/>

    I pray thee, father, give me everything;<br/>

  Give me the joy that makes the children wild;<br/>

    Give throat and heart an old new song to sing.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Ye are my joy, great father, perfect Christ,<br/>

    And humble men of heart, oh, everywhere!<br/>

  With all the true I keep a hoping tryst;<br/>

    Eternal love is my eternal prayer.<br/>
</p>

<p>1890.</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-father-to-a-mother" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Father to a Mother</h2>
<p>  When God's own child came down to earth,<br/>

    High heaven was very glad;<br/>

  The angels sang for holy mirth;<br/>

    Not God himself was sad!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Shall we, when ours goes homeward, fret?<br/>

    Come, Hope, and wait on Sorrow!<br/>

  The little one will not forget;<br/>

    It's only till to-morrow!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-temple-of-god" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Temple of God</h2>
<p>  In the desert by the bush,<br/>

  Moses to his heart said <i>Hush</i>.<br/>
</p>

<p>  David on his bed did pray;<br/>

  God all night went not away.<br/>
</p>

<p>  From his heap of ashes foul<br/>

  Job to God did lift his soul,<br/>
</p>

<p>  God came down to see him there,<br/>

  And to answer all his prayer.<br/>
</p>

<p>  On a dark hill, in the wind,<br/>

  Jesus did his father find,<br/>
</p>

<p>  But while he on earth did fare,<br/>

  Every spot was place of prayer;<br/>
</p>

<p>  And where man is any day,<br/>

  God can not be far away.<br/>
</p>

<p>  But the place he loveth best,<br/>

  Place where he himself can rest,<br/>
</p>

<p>  Where alone he prayer doth seek,<br/>

  Is the spirit of the meek.<br/>
</p>

<p>  To the humble God doth come;<br/>

  In his heart he makes his home.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="going-to-sleep" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Going to Sleep</h2>
<p>  Little one, you must not fret<br/>

    That I take your clothes away;<br/>

  Better sleep you so will get,<br/>

    And at morning wake more gay—<br/>

      Saith the children's mother.<br/>
</p>

<p>  You I must unclothe again,<br/>

    For you need a better dress;<br/>

  Too much worn are body and brain;<br/>

    You need everlastingness—<br/>

      Saith the heavenly father.<br/>
</p>

<p>  I went down death's lonely stair;<br/>

    Laid my garments in the tomb;<br/>

  Dressed again one morning fair;<br/>

    Hastened up, and hied me home—<br/>

      Saith the elder brother.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Then I will not be afraid<br/>

    Any ill can come to me;<br/>

  When 'tis time to go to bed,<br/>

    I will rise and go with thee—<br/>

      Saith the little brother.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-morrow" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To-Morrow</h2>
<p>  My TO-MORROW is but a flitting<br/>

    Fancy of the brain;<br/>

  God's TO-MORROW an angel sitting,<br/>

    Ready for joy or pain.<br/>
</p>

<p>  My TO-MORROW has no soul,<br/>

    Dead as yesterdays;<br/>

  God's—a brimming silver bowl<br/>

    Of life that gleams and plays.<br/>
</p>

<p>  My TO-MORROW, I mock you away!<br/>

    Shadowless nothing, thou!<br/>

  God's TO-MORROW, come, dear day,<br/>

    For God is in thee now.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="foolish-children" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Foolish Children</h2>
<p>  Waking in the night to pray,<br/>

    Sleeping when the answer comes,<br/>

  Foolish are we even at play—<br/>

    Tearfully we beat our drums!<br/>

  Cast the good dry bread away,<br/>

    Weep, and gather up the crumbs!<br/>
</p>

<p>  "Evermore," while shines the day,<br/>

    "Lord," we cry, "thy will be done!"<br/>

  Soon as evening groweth gray,<br/>

    Thy fair will we fain would shun!<br/>

  "Take, oh, take thy hand away!<br/>

    See the horrid dark begun!"<br/>
</p>

<p>  "Thou hast conquered Death," we say,<br/>

    "Christ, whom Hades could not keep!"<br/>

  Then, "Ah, see the pallid clay!<br/>

    Death it is," we cry, "not sleep!<br/>

  Grave, take all. Shut out the Day.<br/>

    Sit we on the ground and weep!"<br/>
</p>

<p>  Gathering potsherds all the day,<br/>

    Truant children, Lord, we roam;<br/>

  Fret, and longer want to play,<br/>

    When at cool thy voice doth come!—<br/>

  Elder Brother, lead the way;<br/>

    Make us good as we go home.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="love-is-home" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Love Is Home</h2>
<p>  Love is the part, and love is the whole;<br/>

    Love is the robe, and love is the pall;<br/>

  Ruler of heart and brain and soul,<br/>

    Love is the lord and the slave of all!<br/>

  I thank thee, Love, that thou lov'st me;<br/>

  I thank thee more that I love thee.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Love is the rain, and love is the air,<br/>

    Love is the earth that holdeth fast;<br/>

  Love is the root that is buried there,<br/>

    Love is the open flower at last!<br/>

  I thank thee, Love all round about,<br/>

  That the eyes of my love are looking out.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Love is the sun, and love is the sea;<br/>

    Love is the tide that comes and goes;<br/>

  Flowing and flowing it comes to me;<br/>

    Ebbing and ebbing to thee it flows!<br/>

  Oh my sun, and my wind, and tide!<br/>

  My sea, and my shore, and all beside!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Light, oh light that art by showing;<br/>

    Wind, oh wind that liv'st by motion;<br/>

  Thought, oh thought that art by knowing;<br/>

    Will, that art born in self-devotion!<br/>

  Love is you, though not all of you know it;<br/>

  Ye are not love, yet ye always show it!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Faithful creator, heart-longed-for father,<br/>

    Home of our heart-infolded brother,<br/>

  Home to thee all thy glories gather—<br/>

    All are thy love, and there is no other!<br/>

  O Love-at-rest, we loves that roam—<br/>

  Home unto thee, we are coming home!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="faith" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Faith</h2>
<pEarth, if aught should check thy race,<br/>

  Rushing through unfended space,<br/>

  Headlong, stayless, thou wilt fall<br/>

  Into yonder glowing ball!"<br/>
</p>

<p>  "Beggar of the universe,<br/>

  Faithless as an empty purse!<br/>

  Sent abroad to cool and tame,<br/>

  Think'st I fear my native flame?"<br/>
</p>

<p>  "If thou never on thy track<br/>

  Turn thee round and hie thee back,<br/>

  Thou wilt wander evermore,<br/>

  Outcast, cold—a comet hoar!"<br/>
</p>

<p>  "While I sweep my ring along<br/>

  In an air of joyous song,<br/>

  Thou art drifting, heart awry,<br/>

  From the sun of liberty!"<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="waiting-2" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Waiting</h2>
<p>  I waited for the Master<br/>

    In the darkness dumb;<br/>

  Light came fast and faster—<br/>

    My light did not come!<br/>
</p>

<p>  I waited all the daylight,<br/>

    All through noon's hot flame:<br/>

  In the evening's gray light,<br/>

    Lo, the Master came!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="our-ship" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Our Ship</h2>
<p>  Had I a great ship coming home,<br/>

    With big plunge o'er the sea,<br/>

  What bright things, hid from star and foam,<br/>

    Lay in her heart for thee!<br/>
</p>

<p>  The stormy billows heave and dip,<br/>

    The wild winds veer and play;<br/>

  But, regnant all, God's stately ship<br/>

    Is steering home this way!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="my-heart-thy-lark" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">My Heart Thy Lark</h2>
<p>  Why dost thou want to sing<br/>

    When thou hast no song, my heart?<br/>

  If there be in thee a hidden spring,<br/>

    Wherefore will no word start?<br/>
</p>

<p>  On its way thou hearest no song,<br/>

    Yet flutters thy unborn joy!<br/>

  The years of thy life are growing long—<br/>

    Art still the heart of a boy?—<br/>
</p>

<p>  Father, I am thy child!<br/>

    My heart is in thy hand!<br/>

  Let it hear some echo, with gladness wild,<br/>

    Of a song in thy high land.<br/>
</p>

<p>  It will answer—but how, my God,<br/>

    Thou knowest; I cannot say:<br/>

  It will spring, I know, thy lark, from thy sod—<br/>

    Thy lark to meet thy day!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="two-in-one" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Two in One</h2>
<p>  Were thou and I the white pinions<br/>

    On some eager, heaven-born dove,<br/>

  Swift would we mount to the old dominions,<br/>

    To our rest of old, my love!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Were thou and I trembling strands<br/>

    In music's enchanted line,<br/>

  We would wait and wait for magic hands<br/>

    To untwist the magic twine.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Were we two sky-tints, thou and I,<br/>

    Thou the golden, I the red;<br/>

  We would quiver and glow and darken and die,<br/>

    And love until we were dead!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Nearer than wings of one dove,<br/>

    Than tones or colours in chord,<br/>

  We are one—and safe, and for ever, my love,<br/>

    Two thoughts in the heart of one Lord.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="bedtime" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Bedtime</h2>
<pCome, children, put away your toys;<br/>

    Roll up that kite's long line;<br/>

  The day is done for girls and boys—<br/>

    Look, it is almost nine!<br/>

  Come, weary foot, and sleepy head,<br/>

  Get up, and come along to bed."<br/>
</p>

<p>  The children, loath, must yet obey;<br/>

    Up the long stair they creep;<br/>

  Lie down, and something sing or say<br/>

    Until they fall asleep,<br/>

  To steal through caverns of the night<br/>

  Into the morning's golden light.<br/>
</p>

<p>  We, elder ones, sit up more late,<br/>

    And tasks unfinished ply,<br/>

  But, gently busy, watch and wait—<br/>

    Dear sister, you and I,<br/>

  To hear the Father, with soft tread,<br/>

  Coming to carry us to bed.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-prayer-2" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Prayer</h2>
<p>  Thou who mad'st the mighty clock<br/>

    Of the great world go;<br/>

  Mad'st its pendulum swing and rock,<br/>

    Ceaseless to and fro;<br/>

  Thou whose will doth push and draw<br/>

    Every orb in heaven,<br/>

  Help me move by higher law<br/>

    In my spirit graven.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Like a planet let me swing—<br/>

    With intention strong;<br/>

  In my orbit rushing sing<br/>

    Jubilant along;<br/>

  Help me answer in my course<br/>

    To my seasons due;<br/>

  Lord of every stayless force,<br/>

    Make my Willing true.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-song-prayer" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Song Prayer</h2>
<p>  Lord Jesus,<br/>

  Oh, ease us<br/>

  Of Self that oppresses,<br/>

  Annoys and distresses<br/>

  Body and brain<br/>

  With dull pain!<br/>

  Thou never,<br/>

  Since ever,<br/>

  Save one moment only,<br/>

  Wast left, or wast lonely:<br/>

  We are alone,<br/>

  And make moan.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Far parted,<br/>

  Dull-hearted,<br/>

  We wander, sleep-walking,<br/>

  Mere shadows, dim-stalking:<br/>

  Orphans we roam,<br/>

  Far from home.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Oh new man,<br/>

  Sole human,<br/>

  God's son, and our brother,<br/>

  Give each to the other—<br/>

  No one left out<br/>

  In cold doubt!<br/>
</p>

<p>  High Father,<br/>

  Oh gather<br/>

  Thy sons and thy daughters,<br/>

  Through fires and through waters,<br/>

  Home to the nest<br/>

  Of thy breast!<br/>
</p>

<p>  There under<br/>

  The wonder<br/>

  Of great wings of healing,<br/>

  Of love and revealing,<br/>

  Teach us anew<br/>

  To sing true.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="reciprocity" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Reciprocity</h2>
<p>  Her mother, Elfie older grown,<br/>

    One evening, for adieu,<br/>

  Said, "You'll not mind being left alone,<br/>

    For God takes care of you!"<br/>
</p>

<p>  In child-way her heart's eye did see<br/>

    The correlation's node:<br/>

  "Yes," she said, "God takes care o' me,<br/>

    An' I take care o' God."<br/>
</p>

<p>  The child and woman were the same,<br/>

    She changed not, only grew;<br/>

  'Twixt God and her no shadow came:<br/>

    The true is always true!<br/>
</p>

<p>  As daughter, sister, promised wife,<br/>

    Her heart with love did brim:<br/>

  Now, sure, it brims as full of life,<br/>

    Hid fourteen years in him!<br/>
</p>

<p>1892.</p>
		</article>
		<article id="what-the-lord-saith" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">What the Lord Saith</h2>
<p>  Trust my father, saith the eldest-born;<br/>

    I did trust him ere the earth began;<br/>

  Not to know him is to be forlorn;<br/>

    Not to love him is—not to be man.<br/>
</p>

<p>  He that knows him loves him altogether;<br/>

    With my father I am so content<br/>

  That through all this dreary human weather<br/>

    I am working, waiting, confident.<br/>
</p>

<p>  He is with me; I am not alone;<br/>

    Life is bliss, because I am his child;<br/>

  Down in Hades will I lay the stone<br/>

    Whence shall rise to Heaven his city piled.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Hearken, brothers, pray you, to my story!<br/>

    Hear me, sister; hearken, child, to me:<br/>

  Our one father is a perfect glory;<br/>

    He is light, and there is none but he.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Come then with me; I will lead the way;<br/>

    All of you, sore-hearted, heavy-shod,<br/>

  Come to father, yours and mine, I pray;<br/>

    Little ones, I pray you, come to God!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="how-shall-he-sing-who-hath-no-song" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">How Shall He Sing Who Hath No Song</h2>
<p>  How shall he sing who hath no song?<br/>

  He laugh who hath no mirth?<br/>

  Will cannot wake the sleeping song!<br/>

  Yea, Love itself in vain may long<br/>

  To sing with them that have a song,<br/>

  Or, mirthless, laugh with Mirth!<br/>

  He who would sing but hath no song<br/>

  Must speak the right, denounce the wrong,<br/>

  Must humbly front the indignant throng,<br/>

  Must yield his back to Satire's thong,<br/>

  Nor shield his face from liar's prong,<br/>

  Must say and do and be the truth,<br/>

  And fearless wait for what ensueth,<br/>

  Wait, wait, with patience sweet and strong,<br/>

  Until God's glory fill the earth;<br/>

  Then shall he sing who had no song,<br/>

  He laugh who had no mirth!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Yea, if in land of stony dearth<br/>

  Like barren rock thou sit,<br/>

  Round which the phantom-waters flit<br/>

  Of heart- and brain-mirage<br/>

  That can no thirst assuage,<br/>

  Yet be thou still, and wait, wait long;<br/>

  A right sea comes to drown the wrong;<br/>

  God's glory comes to fill the earth,<br/>

  And thou, no more a scathed rock,<br/>

  Shalt start alive with gladsome shock,<br/>

  Shalt a hand-clapping billow be,<br/>

  And shout with the eternal sea!<br/>
</p>

<p>  To righteousness and love belong<br/>

  The dance, the jubilance, the song,<br/>

  When the great Right hath quelled the wrong,<br/>

  And Truth hath stilled the lying tongue!<br/>

  Then men must sing because of song,<br/>

  And laugh because of mirth!<br/>

  And this shall be their anthem strong—<br/>

  Hallow! the glad God fills the earth,<br/>

  And Love sits down by every hearth!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="this-world" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">This World</h2>
<p>  Thy world is made to fit thine own,<br/>

    A nursery for thy children small,<br/>

  The playground-footstool of thy throne,<br/>

    Thy solemn school-room, Father of all!<br/>

  When day is done, in twilight's gloom,<br/>

  We pass into thy presence-room.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Because from selfishness and wrath,<br/>

    Our cold and hot extremes of ill,<br/>

  We grope and stagger on the path—<br/>

    Thou tell'st us from thy holy hill,<br/>

  With icy storms and sunshine rude,<br/>

  That we are all unripe in good.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Because of snaky things that creep<br/>

    Through our soul's sea, dim-undulant,<br/>

  Thou fill'st the mystery of thy deep<br/>

    With faces heartless, grim, and gaunt;<br/>

  That we may know how ugly seem<br/>

  The things our spirit-oceans teem.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Because of half-way things that hold<br/>

    Good names, and have a poisonous breath—<br/>

  Prudence that is but trust in gold,<br/>

    And faith that is but fear of death—<br/>

  Amongst thy flowers, the lovely brood,<br/>

  Thou sendest some that are not good.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Thou stay'st thy hand from finishing things<br/>

    To make thy child love the complete;<br/>

  Full many a flower comes up thy springs<br/>

    Unshamed in imperfection sweet;<br/>

  That through good all, and good in part,<br/>

  Thy work be perfect in the heart.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Because, in careless confidence,<br/>

    So oft we leave the narrow way,<br/>

  Its borders thorny hedges fence,<br/>

    Beyond them marshy deeps affray;<br/>

  But farther on, the heavenly road<br/>

  Lies through the gardens of our God.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Because thy sheep so often will<br/>

    Forsake the meadow cool and damp<br/>

  To climb the stony, grassless hill,<br/>

    Or wallow in the slimy swamp,<br/>

  Thy sicknesses, where'er they roam,<br/>

  Go after them to bring them home.<br/>
</p>

<p>  One day, all fear, all ugliness,<br/>

    All pain, all discord, dumb or loud,<br/>

  All selfishness, and all distress,<br/>

    Will melt like low-spread morning cloud,<br/>

  And heart and brain be free from thrall,<br/>

  Because thou, God, art all in all!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="saint-peter" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Saint Peter</h2>
<p>  O Peter, wherefore didst thou doubt?<br/>

  Indeed the spray flew fast about,<br/>

  But he was there whose walking foot<br/>

  Could make the wandering hills take root;<br/>

  And he had said, "Come down to me,"<br/>

  Else hadst thou not set foot on sea!<br/>

  Christ did not call thee to thy grave!<br/>

  Was it the boat that made thee brave?<br/>
</p>

<p>  "Easy for thee who wast not there<br/>

  To think thou more than I couldst dare!<br/>

  It hardly fits thee though to mock<br/>

  Scared as thou wast that railway shock!<br/>

  Who saidst this morn, 'Wife, we must go—<br/>

  The plague will soon be here, I know!'<br/>

  Who, when thy child slept—not to death—<br/>

  Saidst, 'Life is now not worth a breath!'"<br/>
</p>

<p>  Saint Peter, thou rebukest well!<br/>

  It needs no tempest me to quell,<br/>

  Not even a spent lash of its spray!<br/>

  Things far too little to affray<br/>

  Will wake the doubt that's worst of all—<br/>

  Is there a God to hear me call?<br/>

  But if he be, I never think<br/>

  That he will hear and let me sink!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Lord of my little faith, my Lord,<br/>

  Help me to fear nor fire nor sword;<br/>

  Let not the cross itself appall<br/>

  Which bore thee, Life and Lord of all;<br/>

  Let reeling brain nor fainting heart<br/>

  Wipe out the soreness that thou art;<br/>

  Dwell farther in than doubt can go,<br/>

  And make <i>I hope</i> become <i>I know</i>.<br/>

  Then, sure, if thou should please to say,<br/>

  "Come to my side," some stormy way,<br/>

  My feet, atoning to thy will,<br/>

  Shall, heaved and tossed, walk toward thee still;<br/>

  No heart of lead shall sink me where<br/>

  Prudence lies crowned with cold despair,<br/>

  But I shall reach and clasp thy hand,<br/>

  And on the sea forget the land!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="zacchaeus" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Zacchaeus</h2>
<p>  To whom the heavy burden clings,<br/>

    It yet may serve him like a staff;<br/>

  One day the cross will break in wings,<br/>

    The sinner laugh a holy laugh.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The dwarfed Zacchaeus climbed a tree,<br/>

    His humble stature set him high;<br/>

  The Lord the little man did see<br/>

    Who sought the great man passing by.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Up to the tree he came, and stopped:<br/>

    "To-day," he said, "with thee I bide."<br/>

  A spirit-shaken fruit he dropped,<br/>

    Ripe for the Master, at his side.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Sure never host with gladder look<br/>

    A welcome guest home with him bore!<br/>

  Then rose the Satan of rebuke<br/>

    And loudly spake beside the door:<br/>
</p>

<p>  "This is no place for holy feet;<br/>

    Sinners should house and eat alone!<br/>

  This man sits in the stranger's seat<br/>

    And grinds the faces of his own!"<br/>
</p>

<p>  Outspoke the man, in Truth's own might:<br/>

    "Lord, half my goods I give the poor;<br/>

  If one I've taken more than right<br/>

    With four I make atonement sure!"<br/>
</p>

<p>  "Salvation here is entered in;<br/>

    This man indeed is Abraham's son!"<br/>

  Said he who came the lost to win—<br/>

    And saved the lost whom he had won.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="after-thomas-kemp" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">After Thomas Kemp</h2>
<h4>  I.</h4>

<p>  Who follows Jesus shall not walk<br/>

    In darksome road with danger rife;<br/>

  But in his heart the Truth will talk,<br/>

    And on his way will shine the Life.<br/>
</p>

<p>  So, on the story we must pore<br/>

    Of him who lives for us, and died,<br/>

  That we may see him walk before,<br/>

    And know the Father in the guide.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  II.</h4>

<p>  In words of truth Christ all excels,<br/>

    Leaves all his holy ones behind;<br/>

  And he in whom his spirit dwells<br/>

    Their hidden manna sure shall find.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Gather wouldst thou the perfect grains,<br/>

    And Jesus fully understand?<br/>

  Thou must obey him with huge pains,<br/>

    And to God's will be as Christ's hand.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  III.</h4>

<p>  What profits it to reason high<br/>

    And in hard questions court dispute,<br/>

  When thou dost lack humility,<br/>

    Displeasing God at very root!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Profoundest words man ever spake<br/>

    Not once of blame washed any clear;<br/>

  A simple life alone could make<br/>

    Nathanael to his master dear.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  IV.</h4>

<p>  The eye with seeing is not filled,<br/>

    The ear with hearing not at rest;<br/>

  Desire with having is not stilled;<br/>

    With human praise no heart is blest.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Vanity, then, of vanities<br/>

    All things for which men grasp and grope!<br/>

  The precious things in heavenly eyes<br/>

    Are love, and truth, and trust, and hope.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  V.</h4>

<p>  Better the clown who God doth love<br/>

    Than he that high can go<br/>

  And name each little star above<br/>

    But sees not God below!<br/>
</p>

<p>  What if all things on earth I knew,<br/>

    Yea, love were all my creed,<br/>

  It serveth nothing with the True;<br/>

    He goes by heart and deed.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  VI.</h4>

<p>  If thou dost think thy knowledge good,<br/>

    Thy intellect not slow,<br/>

  Bethink thee of the multitude<br/>

    Of things thou dost not know.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Why look on any from on high<br/>

    Because thou knowest more?<br/>

  Thou need'st but look abroad, to spy<br/>

    Ten thousand thee before.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Wouldst thou in knowledge true advance<br/>

    And gather learning's fruit,<br/>

  In love confess thy ignorance,<br/>

    And thy Self-love confute.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  VII.</h4>

<p>  This is the highest learning,<br/>

    The hardest and the best—<br/>

  From self to keep still turning,<br/>

    And honour all the rest.<br/>
</p>

<p>  If one should break the letter,<br/>

    Yea, spirit of command,<br/>

  Think not that thou art better,<br/>

    Thou may'st not always stand!<br/>
</p>

<p>  We all are weak—but weaker<br/>

    Hold no one than thou art;<br/>

  Then, as thou growest meeker,<br/>

    Higher will go thy heart.<br/>
</p>

<h4>  VIII.</h4>

<p>  Sense and judgment oft indeed<br/>

  Spy but little and mislead,<br/>

    Ground us on a shelf!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Happy he whom Truth doth teach,<br/>

  Not by forms of passing speech,<br/>

    But her very self!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Why of hidden things dispute,<br/>

  Mind unwise, howe'er astute,<br/>

    Making that thy task<br/>

  Where the Judge will, at the last,<br/>

  When disputing all is past,<br/>

    Not a question ask?<br/>
</p>

<p>  Folly great it is to brood<br/>

  Over neither bad nor good,<br/>

    Eyes and ears unheedful!<br/>

  Ears and eyes, ah, open wide<br/>

  For what may be heard or spied<br/>

    Of the one thing needful!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-gordon-leaving-khartoum" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To Gordon, Leaving Khartoum</h2>
<p>  The silence of traitorous feet!<br/>

    The silence of close-pent rage!<br/>

  The roar, and the sudden heart-beat!<br/>

      And the shot through the true heart going,<br/>

    The truest heart of the age!<br/>

      And the Nile serenely flowing!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Carnage and curses and cries!<br/>

    He utters never a word;<br/>

  Still as a child he lies;<br/>

      The wind of the desert is blowing<br/>

    Across the dead man of the Lord;<br/>

      And the Nile is softly flowing.<br/>
</p>

<p>  But the song is stilled in heaven<br/>

    To welcome one more king:<br/>

  For the truth he hath witnessed and striven,<br/>

      And let the world go crowing,<br/>

    And Mammon's church-bell go ring,<br/>

      And the Nile blood-red go flowing!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Man who hated the sword<br/>

    Yet wielded the sword and axe—<br/>

  Farewell, O arm of the Lord,<br/>

      The Lord's own harvest mowing—<br/>

    With a wind in the smoking flax<br/>

      Where our foul rivers are flowing!<br/>
</p>

<p>  In war thou didst cherish peace,<br/>

    Thou slewest for love of life:<br/>

  Hail, hail thy stormy release<br/>

      Go home and await thy sowing,<br/>

    The patient flower of thy strife,<br/>

      Thy bread on the Nile cast flowing.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Not thy earth to our earth alone,<br/>

    Thy spirit is left with us!<br/>

  Thy body is victory's throne,<br/>

      And our hearts around it are glowing:<br/>

    Would that we others died thus<br/>

      Where the Thames and the Clyde are flowing!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="song-of-the-saints-and-angels" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Song of the Saints and Angels</h2>
<h5>JANUARY 26, 1885.</h5>

<p>  Gordon, the self-refusing,<br/>

  Gordon, the lover of God,<br/>

  Gordon, the good part choosing,<br/>

  Welcome along the road!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Thou knowest the man, O Father!<br/>

  To do thy will he ran;<br/>

  Men's praises he did not gather:<br/>

  There is scarce such another man!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Thy black sheep's faithful shepherd<br/>

  Who knew not how to flee,<br/>

  Is torn by the desert leopard,<br/>

  And comes wounded home to thee!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Home he is coming the faster<br/>

  That the way he could not miss:<br/>

  In thy arms, oh take him, Master,<br/>

  And heal him with a kiss!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Then give him a thousand cities<br/>

  To rule till their evils cease,<br/>

  And their wailing minor ditties<br/>

  Die in a psalm of peace.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="failure" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Failure</h2>
<p>  Farewell, O Arm of the Lord!<br/>

  Man who hated the sword,<br/>

  Yet struck and spared not the thing abhorred!<br/>

  Farewell, O word of the Word!<br/>

  Man who knew no failure<br/>

  But the failure of the Lord!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-e-g-dedicating-a-book" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To E. G., Dedicating a Book</h2>
<p>  A broken tale of endless things,<br/>

    Take, lady: thou art not of those<br/>

  Who in what vale a fountain springs<br/>

    Would have its journey close.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Countless beginnings, fair first parts,<br/>

    Leap to the light, and shining flow;<br/>

  All broken things, or toys or hearts,<br/>

    Are mended where they go.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Then down thy stream, with hope-filled sail,<br/>

    Float faithful fearless on, loved friend;<br/>

  'Tis God that has begun the tale<br/>

    And does not mean to end.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-g-m-t" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To G. M. T.</h2>
<p>  The sun is sinking in the west,<br/>

    Long grow the shadows dim;<br/>

  Have patience, sister, to be blest,<br/>

    Wait patiently for Him.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Thou knowest love, much love hast had,<br/>

    Great things of love mayst tell,<br/>

  Ought'st never to be very sad<br/>

    For thou too hast lov'd well.<br/>
</p>

<p>  His house thou know'st, who on the brink<br/>

    Of death loved more than thou,<br/>

  Loved more than thy great heart can think,<br/>

    And just as then loves now—<br/>
</p>

<p>  In that great house is one who waits<br/>

    For thy slow-coming foot;<br/>

  Glad is he with his angel-mates<br/>

    Yet often listens mute,<br/>
</p>

<p>  For he of all men loves thee best:<br/>

    He haunts the heavenly clock;<br/>

  Ah, he has long been up and drest<br/>

    To open to thy knock!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Fear not, doubt not because of those<br/>

    On whom earth's keen winds blow;<br/>

  God's love shames all our pitying woes,<br/>

    Be ready thou to go.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Forsaken dream not hearts which here<br/>

    Bask in no sunny shine;<br/>

  Each shall one coming day be dear<br/>

    To love as good as thine.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="in-memoriam-lady-caroline-charteris" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">In Memoriam Lady Caroline Charteris</h2>
<p>  The mountain-stream may humbly boast<br/>

    For her the loud waves call;<br/>

  The hamlet feeds the nation's host,<br/>

    The home-farm feeds the hall;<br/>
</p>

<p>  And unto earth heaven's Lord doth lend<br/>

    The right, of high import,<br/>

  The gladsome privilege to send<br/>

    New courtiers to Love's court.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Not strange to thee, O lady dear,<br/>

    Life in that palace fair,<br/>

  For thou while waiting with us here<br/>

    Didst just as they do there!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Thy heart still open to receive,<br/>

    Open thy hand to give,<br/>

  God had thee graced with more than leave<br/>

    In heavenly state to live!<br/>
</p>

<p>  And though thou art gone up so high<br/>

    Thou art not gone so far<br/>

  But that thy love to us comes nigh,<br/>

    As starlight from a star.<br/>
</p>

<p>  And ours must reach where'er thou art,<br/>

    In far or near abode,<br/>

  For God is of all love the heart,<br/>

    And we are all in God.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-mammon-marriage" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Mammon-Marriage</h2>
<p>The croak of a raven hoar!<br/>

  A dog's howl, kennel-tied!<br/>

Loud shuts the carriage-door:<br/>

  The two are away on their ghastly ride<br/>

To Death's salt shore!<br/>
</p>

<p>Where are the love and the grace?<br/>

  The bridegroom is thirsty and cold!<br/>

The bride's skull sharpens her face!<br/>

  But the coachman is driving, jubilant, bold,<br/>

The devil's pace.<br/>
</p>

<p>The horses shivered and shook<br/>

  Waiting gaunt and haggard<br/>

With sorry and evil look;<br/>

  But swift as a drunken wind they staggered<br/>

'Longst Lethe brook.<br/>
</p>

<p>Long since, they ran no more;<br/>

  Heavily pulling they died<br/>

On the sand of the hopeless shore<br/>

  Where never swelled or sank a tide,<br/>

And the salt burns sore.<br/>
</p>

<p>Flat their skeletons lie,<br/>

  White shadows on shining sand;<br/>

The crusted reins go high<br/>

  To the crumbling coachman's bony hand<br/>

On his knees awry.<br/>
</p>

<p>Side by side, jarring no more,<br/>

  Day and night side by side,<br/>

Each by a doorless door,<br/>

  Motionless sit the bridegroom and bride<br/>

On the Dead-Sea-shore.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-song-in-the-night-1" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Song in the Night</h2>
<p>A brown bird sang on a blossomy tree,<br/>

Sang in the moonshine, merrily,<br/>

Three little songs, one, two, and three,<br/>

A song for his wife, for himself, and me.<br/>
</p>

<p>He sang for his wife, sang low, sang high,<br/>

Filling the moonlight that filled the sky;<br/>

"Thee, thee, I love thee, heart alive!<br/>

Thee, thee, thee, and thy round eggs five!"<br/>
</p>

<p>He sang to himself, "What shall I do<br/>

With this life that thrills me through and through!<br/>

Glad is so glad that it turns to ache!<br/>

Out with it, song, or my heart will break!"<br/>
</p>

<p>He sang to me, "Man, do not fear<br/>

Though the moon goes down and the dark is near;<br/>

Listen my song and rest thine eyes;<br/>

Let the moon go down that the sun may rise!"<br/>
</p>

<p>I folded me up in the heart of his tune,<br/>

And fell asleep with the sinking moon;<br/>

I woke with the day's first golden gleam,<br/>

And, lo, I had dreamed a precious dream!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="loves-history" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Love's History</h2>
<p>Love, the baby,<br/>

  Crept abroad to pluck a flower:<br/>

One said, Yes, sir; one said, Maybe;<br/>

  One said, Wait the hour.<br/>
</p>

<p>Love, the boy,<br/>

  Joined the youngsters at their play:<br/>

But they gave him little joy,<br/>

  And he went away.<br/>
</p>

<p>Love, the youth,<br/>

  Roamed the country, quiver-laden;<br/>

From him fled away in sooth<br/>

  Many a man and maiden!<br/>
</p>

<p>Love, the man,<br/>

  Sought a service all about;<br/>

But they called him feeble, one<br/>

  They could do without.<br/>
</p>

<p>Love, the aged,<br/>

  Walking, bowed, the shadeless miles,<br/>

Read a volume many-paged,<br/>

  Full of tears and smiles.<br/>
</p>

<p>Love, the weary,<br/>

  Tottered down the shelving road:<br/>

At its foot, lo, Night, the starry,<br/>

  Meeting him from God!<br/>
</p>

<p>"Love, the holy,"<br/>

  Sang a music in her dome,<br/>

Sang it softly, sang it slowly,<br/>

  "Love is coming home!"<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-lark-and-the-wind" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Lark and the Wind</h2>
<p>In the air why such a ringing?<br/>

  On the earth why such a droning?<br/>
</p>

<p>In the air the lark is singing;<br/>

  On the earth the wind is moaning.<br/>
</p>

<p>"I am blest, in sunlight swinging!"<br/>

  "Sad am I: the world lies groaning!"<br/>
</p>

<p>In the sky the lark kept singing;<br/>

  On the earth the wind kept moaning.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-dead-house" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Dead House</h2>
<p>When the clock hath ceased to tick<br/>

  Soul-like in the gloomy hall;<br/>

When the latch no more doth click<br/>

  Tongue-like in the red peach-wall;<br/>

When no more come sounds of play,<br/>

  Mice nor children romping roam,<br/>

Then looks down the eye of day<br/>

  On a dead house, not a home!<br/>
</p>

<p>But when, like an old sun's ghost,<br/>

  Haunts her vault the spectral moon;<br/>

When earth's margins all are lost,<br/>

  Melting shapes nigh merged in swoon,<br/>

Then a sound—hark! there again!—<br/>

  No, 'tis not a nibbling mouse!<br/>

'Tis a ghost, unseen of men,<br/>

  Walking through the bare-floored house!<br/>
</p>

<p>And with lightning on the stair<br/>

  To that silent upper room,<br/>

With the thunder-shaken air<br/>

  Sudden gleaming into gloom,<br/>

With a frost-wind whistling round,<br/>

  From the raging northern coasts,<br/>

Then, mid sieging light and sound,<br/>

  All the house is live with ghosts!<br/>
</p>

<p>Brother, is thy soul a cell<br/>

  Empty save of glittering motes,<br/>

Where no live loves live and dwell,<br/>

  Only notions, things, and thoughts?<br/>

Then thou wilt, when comes a Breath<br/>

  Tempest-shaking ridge and post,<br/>

Find thyself alone with Death<br/>

  In a house where walks no ghost.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="master-and-boy" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Master and Boy</h2>
<p>"WHO is this little one lying,"<br/>

  Said Time, "at my garden-gate,<br/>

Moaning and sobbing and crying,<br/>

  Out in the cold so late?"<br/>
</p>

<p>"They lurked until we came near,<br/>

  Master and I," the child said,<br/>

"Then caught me, with 'Welcome, New-year!<br/>

  Happy Year! Golden-head!'<br/>
</p>

<p>"See Christmas-day, my Master,<br/>

  On the meadow a mile away!<br/>

Father Time, make me run faster!<br/>

  I'm the Shadow of Christmas-day!"<br/>
</p>

<p>"Run, my child; still he's in sight!<br/>

  Only look well to his track;<br/>

Little Shadow, run like the light,<br/>

  He misses you at his back!"<br/>
</p>

<p>Old Time sat down in the sun<br/>

  On a grave-stone—his legs were numb:<br/>

"When the boy to his master has run,"<br/>

  He said, "Heaven's New Year is come!"<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-clock-of-the-universe" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Clock of the Universe</h2>
<p>  A clock aeonian, steady and tall,<br/>

With its back to creation's flaming wall,<br/>

Stands at the foot of a dim, wide stair.<br/>

Swing, swang, its pendulum goes,<br/>

Swing—swang—here—there!<br/>

Its tick and its tack like the sledge-hammer blows<br/>

Of Tubal Cain, the mighty man!<br/>

But they strike on the anvil of never an ear,<br/>

On the heart of man and woman they fall,<br/>

With an echo of blessing, an echo of ban;<br/>

For each tick is a hope, each tack is a fear,<br/>

Each tick is a <i>Where</i>, each tack a <i>Not here</i>,<br/>

Each tick is a kiss, each tack is a blow,<br/>

Each tick says <i>Why</i>, each tack <i>I don't know</i>.<br/>

Swing, swang, the pendulum!<br/>

Tick and tack, and <i>go</i> and <i>come</i>,<br/>

With a haunting, far-off, dreamy hum,<br/>

With a tick, tack, loud and dumb,<br/>

Swings the pendulum.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Two hands, together joined in prayer,<br/>

With a roll and a volley of spheric thunder;<br/>

Two hands, in hope spread half asunder,<br/>

An empty gulf of longing embrace;<br/>

Two hands, wide apart as they can fare<br/>

In a fear still coasting not touching Despair,<br/>

But turning again, ever round to prayer:<br/>

Two hands, human hands, pass with awful motion<br/>

From isle to isle of the sapphire ocean.<br/>
</p>

<p>  The silent, surfaceless ocean-face<br/>

Is filled with a brooding, hearkening grace;<br/>

The stars dream in, and sink fainting out,<br/>

And the sun and the moon go walking about,<br/>

Walking about in it, solemn and slow,<br/>

Solemn and slow, at a thinking pace,<br/>

Walking about in it to and fro,<br/>

Walking, walking about.<br/>
</p>

<p>  With open beak and half-open wing<br/>

Ever with eagerness quivering,<br/>

On the peak of the clock<br/>

Stands a cock:<br/>

Tip-toe stands the cock to crow—<br/>

Golden cock with silver call<br/>

Clear as trumpet tearing the sky!<br/>

No one yet has heard him cry,<br/>

Nor ever will till the hour supreme<br/>

When Self on itself shall turn with a scream,<br/>

What time the hands are joined on high<br/>

In a hoping, despairing, speechless sigh,<br/>

The perfect groan-prayer of the universe<br/>

When the darkness clings and will not disperse<br/>

Though the time is come, told ages ago,<br/>

For the great white rose of the world to blow:<br/>

—Tick, tack, to the waiting cock,<br/>

Tick, tack, goes the aeon-clock!<br/>
</p>

<p>  A polar bear, golden and gray,<br/>

Crawls and crawls around the top.<br/>

Black and black as an Ethiop<br/>

The great sea-serpent lies coiled beneath,<br/>

Living, living, but does not breathe.<br/>

For the crawling bear is so far away<br/>

That he cannot hear, by night or day,<br/>

The bourdon big of his deep bear-bass<br/>

Roaring atop of the silent face,<br/>

Else would he move, and none knows then<br/>

What would befall the sons of men!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Eat up old Time, O raging Bear;<br/>

Take Bald-head, and the children spare!<br/>

Lie still, O Serpent, nor let one breath<br/>

Stir thy pool and stay Time's death!<br/>

Steady, Hands! for the noon is nigh:<br/>

See the silvery ghost of the Dawning shy<br/>

Low on the floor of the level sky!<br/>

Warn for the strike, O blessed Clock;<br/>

Gather thy clarion breath, gold Cock;<br/>

Push on the month-figures, pale, weary-faced Moon;<br/>

Tick, awful Pendulum, tick amain;<br/>

And soon, oh, soon,<br/>

Lord of life, and Father of boon,<br/>

Give us our own in our arms again!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Then the great old clock to pieces will fall<br/>

Sans groaning of axle or whirring of wheel.<br/>

And away like a mist of the morning steal,<br/>

To stand no more in creation's hall;<br/>

Its mighty weights will fall down plumb<br/>

Into the regions where all is dumb;<br/>

No more will its hands, in horror or prayer,<br/>

Be lifted or spread at the foot of the stair<br/>

That springs aloft to the Father's room;<br/>

Its tick and its tack, <i>When?—Not now</i>,<br/>

Will cease, and its muffled groan below;<br/>

Its sapphire face will dissolve away<br/>

In the dawn of the perfect, love-potent day;<br/>

The serpent and bear will be seen no more,<br/>

Growling atop, or prone on the floor;<br/>

And up the stair will run as they please<br/>

The children to clasp the Father's knees.<br/>
</p>

<p>O God, our father, Allhearts' All,<br/>

Open the doors of thy clockless hall!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-thorn-in-the-flesh" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Thorn in the Flesh</h2>
<p>Within my heart a worm had long been hid.<br/>

I knew it not when I went down and chid<br/>

Because some servants of my inner house<br/>

Had not, I found, of late been doing well,<br/>

But then I spied the horror hideous<br/>

Dwelling defiant in the inmost cell—<br/>

No, not the inmost, for there God did dwell!<br/>

But the small monster, softly burrowing,<br/>

Near by God's chamber had made itself a den,<br/>

And lay in it and grew, the noisome thing!<br/>

Aghast I prayed—'twas time I did pray then!<br/>

But as I prayed it seemed the loathsome shape<br/>

Grew livelier, and did so gnaw and scrape<br/>

That I grew faint. Whereon to me he said—<br/>

Some one, that is, who held my swimming head,<br/>

"Lo, I am with thee: let him do his worst;<br/>

The creature is, but not his work, accurst;<br/>

Thou hating him, he is as a thing dead."<br/>

Then I lay still, nor thought, only endured.<br/>

At last I said, "Lo, now I am inured<br/>

A burgess of Pain's town!" The pain grew worse.<br/>

Then I cried out as if my heart would break.<br/>

But he, whom, in the fretting, sickening ache,<br/>

I had forgotten, spoke: "The law of the universe<br/>

Is this," he said: "Weakness shall be the nurse<br/>

Of strength. The help I had will serve thee too."<br/>

So I took courage and did bear anew.<br/>

At last, through bones and flesh and shrinking skin,<br/>

Lo, the thing ate his way, and light came in,<br/>

And the thing died. I knew then what it meant,<br/>

And, turning, saw the Lord on whom I leant.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="lycabas" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Lycabas</h2>
<p>A name of the Year. Some say the word means <i>a march of wolves</i>,
which wolves, running in single file, are the Months of the Year.
Others say the word means <i>the path of the light</i>.</p>

<p>  O ye months of the year,<br/>

Are ye a march of wolves?<br/>

Lycabas! Lycabas! twelve to growl and slay?<br/>

Men hearken at night, and lie in fear,<br/>

Some men hearken all day!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Lycabas, verily thou art a gallop of wolves,<br/>

Gaunt gray wolves, gray months of the year, hunting in twelves,<br/>

Running and howling, head to tail,<br/>

In a single file, over the snow,<br/>

A long low gliding of silent horror and fear!<br/>

On and on, ghastly and drear,<br/>

Not a head turning, not a foot swerving, ye go,<br/>

Twelve making only a one-wolf track!<br/>

Onward ye howl, and behind we wail;<br/>

Wail behind your narrow and slack<br/>

Wallowing line, and moan and weep,<br/>

As ye draw it on, straight and deep,<br/>

Thorough the night so swart!<br/>

Behind you a desert, and eyes a-weary,<br/>

A long, bare highway, stony and dreary,<br/>

A hungry soul, and a wolf-cub wrapt,<br/>

A live wolf-cub, sharp-toothed, steel-chapt,<br/>

In the garment next the heart!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Lycabas!<br/>

One of them hurt me sore!<br/>

Two of them hurt and tore!<br/>

Three of them made me bleed!<br/>

The fourth did a terrible deed,<br/>

Rent me the worst of the four!<br/>

Rent me, and shook me, and tore,<br/>

And ran away with a growl!<br/>

Lycabas, if I feared you a jot,<br/>

You, and your devils running in twelves,<br/>

Black-mouthed, hell-throated, straight-going wolves,<br/>

I would run like a wolf, I too, and howl!<br/>

I live, and I fear you not.<br/>
</p>

<p>  But shall I not hate you, low-galloping wolves<br/>

Hunting in ceaseless twelves?<br/>

Ye have hunted away my lambs!<br/>

Ye ran at them open-mouthed,<br/>

And your mouths were gleamy-toothed,<br/>

And their whiteness with red foam frothed,<br/>

And your throats were a purple-black gulf:<br/>

My lambs they fled, and they came not back!<br/>

Lovely white lambs they were, alack!<br/>

They fled afar and they left a track<br/>

Which at night, when the lone sky clears,<br/>

Glistens with Nature's tears!<br/>

Many a shepherd scarce thinks of a lamb<br/>

But he hears behind it the growl of a wolf,<br/>

And behind that the wail of its dam!<br/>
</p>

<p>  They ran, nor cried, but fled<br/>

From day's sweet pasture, from night's soft bed:<br/>

Ah me, the look in their eyes!<br/>

For behind them rushed the swallowing gulf,<br/>

The maw of the growl-throated wolf,<br/>

And they fled as the thing that speeds or dies:<br/>

They looked not behind,<br/>

But fled as over the grass the wind.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Oh my lambs, I would drop away<br/>

Into a night that never saw day<br/>

That so in your dear hearts you might say,<br/>

"<i>All is well for ever and aye!</i>"<br/>

Yet it was well to hurry away,<br/>

To hurry from me, your shepherd gray:<br/>

I had no sword to bite and slay,<br/>

And the wolfy Months were on your track!<br/>

It was well to start from work and play,<br/>

It was well to hurry from me away—<br/>

But why not once look back?<br/>
</p>

<p>  The wolves came panting down the lea—<br/>

What was left you but somewhere flee!<br/>

Ye saw the Shepherd that never grows old,<br/>

Ye saw the great Shepherd, and him ye knew,<br/>

And the wolves never once came near to you;<br/>

For he saw you coming, threw down his crook,<br/>

Ran, and his arms about you threw;<br/>

He gathered you into his garment's fold,<br/>

He kneeled, he gathered, he lifted you,<br/>

And his bosom and arms were full of you.<br/>

He has taken you home to his stronghold:<br/>

Out of the castle of Love ye look;<br/>

The castle of Love is now your home,<br/>

From the garden of Love you will never roam,<br/>

And the wolves no more shall flutter you.<br/>
</p>

<p>  Lycabas! Lycabas!<br/>

For all your hunting and howling and cries,<br/>

Your yelling of <i>woe</i>! and <i>alas</i>!<br/>

For all your thin tongues and your fiery eyes,<br/>

Your questing thorough the windy grass,<br/>

Your gurgling gnar, and your horrent hair,<br/>

And your white teeth that will not spare—<br/>

Wolves, I fear you never a jot,<br/>

Though you come at me with your mouths red-hot,<br/>

Eyes of fury, and teeth that foam:<br/>

Ye can do nothing but drive me home!<br/>

Wolves, wolves, you will lie one day—<br/>

Ye are lying even now, this very day,<br/>

Wolves in twelves, gaunt and gray,<br/>

At the feet of the Shepherd that leads the dams,<br/>

At the feet of the Shepherd that carries the lambs!<br/>
</p>

<p>  And now that I see you with my mind's eye,<br/>

What are you indeed? my mind revolves.<br/>

Are you, are you verily wolves?<br/>

I saw you only through twilight dark,<br/>

Through rain and wind, and ill could mark!<br/>

Now I come near—are you verily wolves?<br/>

Ye have torn, but I never saw you slay!<br/>

Me ye have torn, but I live to-day,<br/>

Live, and hope to live ever and aye!<br/>

Closer still let me look at you!—<br/>

Black are your mouths, but your eyes are true!—<br/>

Now, now I know you!—the Shepherd's sheep-dogs!<br/>

Friends of us sheep on the moors and bogs,<br/>

Lost so often in swamps and fogs!<br/>

Dear creatures, forgive me; I did you wrong;<br/>

You to the castle of Love belong:<br/>

Forgive the sore heart that made sharp the tongue!<br/>

Your swift-flying feet the Shepherd sends<br/>

To gather the lambs, his little friends,<br/>

And draw the sheep after for rich amends!<br/>

Sharp are your teeth, my wolves divine,<br/>

But loves and no hates in your deep eyes shine!<br/>

No more will I call you evil names,<br/>

No more assail you with untrue blames!<br/>

Wake me with howling, check me with biting,<br/>

Rouse up my strength for the holy fighting:<br/>

Hunt me still back, nor let me stray<br/>

Out of the infinite narrow way,<br/>

The radiant march of the Lord of Light<br/>

Home to the Father of Love and Might,<br/>

Where each puts Thou in the place of I,<br/>

And Love is the Law of Liberty.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="in-the-night" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">In the Night</h2>
<p>As to her child a mother calls,<br/>

"Come to me, child; come near!"<br/>

Calling, in silent intervals,<br/>

The Master's voice I hear.<br/>
</p>

<p>But does he call me verily?<br/>

To have me does he care?<br/>

Why should he seek my poverty,<br/>

My selfishness so bare?<br/>
</p>

<p>The dear voice makes his gladness brim,<br/>

But not a child can know<br/>

Why that large woman cares for him,<br/>

Why she should love him so!<br/>
</p>

<p>Lord, to thy call of me I bow,<br/>

Obey like Abraham:<br/>

Thou lov'st me because thou art thou,<br/>

And I am what I am!<br/>
</p>

<p>Doubt whispers, <i>Thou art such a blot<br/>

He cannot love poor thee</i>:<br/>

If what I am he loveth not,<br/>

He loves what I shall be.<br/>
</p>

<p>Nay, that which can be drawn and wooed,<br/>

And turned away from ill,<br/>

Is what his father made for good:<br/>

He loves me, I say still!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-giver" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Giver</h2>
<p>To give a thing and take again<br/>

Is counted meanness among men;<br/>

To take away what once is given<br/>

Cannot then be the way of heaven!<br/>
</p>

<p>But human hearts are crumbly stuff,<br/>

And never, never love enough,<br/>

Therefore God takes and, with a smile,<br/>

Puts our best things away a while.<br/>
</p>

<p>Thereon some weep, some rave, some scorn,<br/>

Some wish they never had been born;<br/>

Some humble grow at last and still,<br/>

And then God gives them what they will.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="false-prophets" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">False Prophets</h2>
<p>Would-be prophets tell us<br/>

We shall not re-know<br/>

Them that walked our fellows<br/>

In the ways below!<br/>
</p>

<p>Smoking, smouldering Tophets<br/>

Steaming hopeless plaints!<br/>

Dreary, mole-eyed prophets!<br/>

Mean, skin-pledging saints!<br/>
</p>

<p>Knowing not the Father<br/>

What their prophecies!<br/>

Grapes of such none gather,<br/>

Only thorns and lies.<br/>
</p>

<p>Loving thus the brother,<br/>

How the Father tell?<br/>

Go without each other<br/>

To your heavenly hell!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="life-weary" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Life-Weary</h2>
<p>O Thou that walkest with nigh hopeless feet<br/>

Past the one harbour, built for thee and thine.<br/>

Doth no stray odour from its table greet,<br/>

No truant beam from fire or candle shine?<br/>
</p>

<p>At his wide door the host doth stand and call;<br/>

At every lattice gracious forms invite;<br/>

Thou seest but a dull-gray, solid wall<br/>

In forest sullen with the things of night!<br/>
</p>

<p>Thou cravest rest, and Rest for thee doth crave,<br/>

The white sheet folded down, white robe apart.—<br/>

Shame, Faithless! No, I do not mean the grave!<br/>

I mean Love's very house and hearth and heart.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="approaches" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Approaches</h2>
<p>When thou turn'st away from ill,<br/>

Christ is this side of thy hill.<br/>
</p>

<p>When thou turnest toward good,<br/>

Christ is walking in thy wood.<br/>
</p>

<p>When thy heart says, "Father, pardon!"<br/>

Then the Lord is in thy garden.<br/>
</p>

<p>When stern Duty wakes to watch,<br/>

Then his hand is on the latch.<br/>
</p>

<p>But when Hope thy song doth rouse,<br/>

Then the Lord is in the house.<br/>
</p>

<p>When to love is all thy wit,<br/>

Christ doth at thy table sit.<br/>
</p>

<p>When God's will is thy heart's pole,<br/>

Then is Christ thy very soul.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="travellers-song" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Travellers' Song</h2>
<p>Bands of dark and bands of light<br/>

Lie athwart the homeward way;<br/>

Now we cross a belt of Night,<br/>

Now a strip of shining Day!<br/>
</p>

<p>Now it is a month of June,<br/>

Now December's shivering hour;<br/>

Now rides high loved memories' Moon,<br/>

Now the Dark is dense with power!<br/>
</p>

<p>Summers, winters, days, and nights,<br/>

Moons, and clouds, they come and go;<br/>

Joys and sorrows, pains, delights,<br/>

Hope and fear, and <i>yes</i> and <i>no</i>.<br/>
</p>

<p>All is well: come, girls and boys,<br/>

Not a weary mile is vain!<br/>

Hark—dim laughter's radiant noise!<br/>

See the windows through the rain!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="love-is-strength" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Love Is Strength</h2>
<p>Love alone is great in might,<br/>

Makes the heavy burden light,<br/>

Smooths rough ways to weary feet,<br/>

Makes the bitter morsel sweet:<br/>

Love alone is strength!<br/>
</p>

<p>Might that is not born of Love<br/>

Is not Might born from above,<br/>

Has its birthplace down below<br/>

Where they neither reap nor sow:<br/>

Love alone is strength!<br/>
</p>

<p>Love is stronger than all force,<br/>

Is its own eternal source;<br/>

Might is always in decay,<br/>

Love grows fresher every day:<br/>

Love alone is strength!<br/>
</p>

<p>Little ones, no ill can chance;<br/>

Fear ye not, but sing and dance;<br/>

Though the high-heaved heaven should fall<br/>

God is plenty for us all:<br/>

God is Love and Strength!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="coming" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Coming</h2>
<p>When the snow is on the earth<br/>

Birds and waters cease their mirth;<br/>

When the sunlight is prevailing<br/>

Even the night-winds drop their wailing.<br/>
</p>

<p>On the earth when deep snows lie<br/>

Still the sun is in the sky,<br/>

And when most we miss his fire<br/>

He is ever drawing nigher.<br/>
</p>

<p>In the darkest winter day<br/>

Thou, God, art not far away;<br/>

When the nights grow colder, drearer,<br/>

Father, thou art coming nearer!<br/>
</p>

<p>For thee coming I would watch<br/>

With my hand upon the latch—<br/>

Of the door, I mean, that faces<br/>

Out upon the eternal spaces!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-song-of-the-waiting-dead" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Song of the Waiting Dead</h2>
<p>With us there is no gray fearing,<br/>

With us no aching for lack!<br/>

For the morn it is always nearing,<br/>

And the night is at our back.<br/>

At times a song will fall dumb,<br/>

A thought-bell burst in a sigh,<br/>

But no one says, "He will not come!"<br/>

She says, "He is almost nigh!"<br/>
</p>

<p>The thing you call a sorrow<br/>

Is our delight on its way:<br/>

We know that the coming morrow<br/>

Comes on the wheels of to-day!<br/>

Our Past is a child asleep;<br/>

Delay is ripening the kiss;<br/>

The rising tear we will not weep<br/>

Until it flow for bliss.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="obedience" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Obedience</h2>
<p>Trust him in the common light;<br/>

Trust him in the awesome night;<br/>
</p>

<p>Trust him when the earth doth quake:<br/>

Trust him when thy heart doth ache;<br/>
</p>

<p>Trust him when thy brain doth reel<br/>

And thy friend turns on his heel;<br/>
</p>

<p>Trust him when the way is rough,<br/>

Cry not yet, <i>It is enough</i>!<br/>
</p>

<p>But obey with true endeavour,<br/>

Else the salt hath lost his savour.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-song-in-the-night-2" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Song in the Night</h2>
<p>I would I were an angel strong,<br/>

An angel of the sun, hasting along!<br/>
</p>

<p>I would I were just come awake,<br/>

A child outbursting from night's dusky brake!<br/>
</p>

<p>Or lark whose inward, upward fate<br/>

Mocks every wall that masks the heavenly gate!<br/>
</p>

<p>Or hopeful cock whose clarion clear<br/>

Shrills ten times ere a film of dawn appear!<br/>
</p>

<p>Or but a glowworm: even then<br/>

My light would come straight from the Light of Men!<br/>
</p>

<p>I am a dead seed, dark and slow:<br/>

Father of larks and children, make me grow.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="de-profundis" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">De Profundis</h2>
<p>When I am dead unto myself, and let,<br/>

O Father, thee live on in me,<br/>

Contented to do nought but pay my debt,<br/>

And leave the house to thee,<br/>
</p>

<p>Then shall I be thy ransomed—from the cark<br/>

Of living, from the strain for breath,<br/>

From tossing in my coffin strait and dark,<br/>

At hourly strife with death!<br/>
</p>

<p>Have mercy! in my coffin! and awake!<br/>

A buried temple of the Lord!<br/>

Grow, Temple, grow! Heart, from thy cerements break!<br/>

Stream out, O living Sword!<br/>
</p>

<p>When I am with thee as thou art with me,<br/>

Life will be self-forgetting power;<br/>

Love, ever conscious, buoyant, clear, and free,<br/>

Will flame in darkest hour.<br/>
</p>

<p>Where now I sit alone, unmoving, calm,<br/>

With windows open to thy wind,<br/>

Shall I not know thee in the radiant psalm<br/>

Soaring from heart and mind?<br/>
</p>

<p>The body of this death will melt away,<br/>

And I shall know as I am known;<br/>

Know thee my father, every hour and day,<br/>

As thou know'st me thine own!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="blind-sorrow" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Blind Sorrow</h2>
<p>"My life is drear; walking I labour sore;<br/>

  The heart in me is heavy as a stone;<br/>

And of my sorrows this the icy core:<br/>

  Life is so wide, and I am all alone!"<br/>
</p>

<p>Thou did'st walk so, with heaven-born eyes down bent<br/>

  Upon the earth's gold-rosy, radiant clay,<br/>

That thou had'st seen no star in all God's tent<br/>

  Had not thy tears made pools first on the way.<br/>
</p>

<p>Ah, little knowest thou the tender care<br/>

  In a love-plenteous cloak around thee thrown!<br/>

Full many a dim-seen, saving mountain-stair<br/>

  Toiling thou climb'st—but not one step alone!<br/>
</p>

<p>Lift but thy languid head and see thy guide;<br/>

  Let thy steps go in his, nor choose thine own;<br/>

Then soon wilt thou, thine eyes with wonder wide,<br/>

  Cry, <i>Now I know I never was alone</i>!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="angels" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Angels</h2>
<p>Came of old to houses lonely<br/>

  Men with wings, but did not show them:<br/>

Angels come to our house, only,<br/>

  For their wings, they do not know them!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-fathers-worshippers" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Father's Worshippers</h2>
<p>'Tis we, not in thine arms, who weep and pray;<br/>

The children in thy bosom laugh and play.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-birthday-wish" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Birthday-Wish</h2>
<p>Who know thee, love: thy life be such<br/>

  That, ere the year be o'er,<br/>

Each one who loves thee now so much,<br/>

  Even God, may love thee more!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-any-one" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To Any One</h2>
<p>Go not forth to call Dame Sorrow<br/>

From the dim fields of Tomorrow;<br/>

Let her roam there all unheeded,<br/>

She will come when she is needed;<br/>

Then, when she draws near thy door,<br/>

She will find God there before.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="waiting-1" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Waiting</h2>
<p>Lie, little cow, and chew thy cud,<br/>

  The farmer soon will shift thy tether;<br/>

Chirp, linnet, on the frozen mud,<br/>

  Sun and song will come together;<br/>

Wait, soul, for God, and thou shalt bud,<br/>

  He waits thy waiting with his weather.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="lost-but-safe" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Lost but Safe</h2>
<p>Lost the little one roams about,<br/>

Pathway or shelter none can find;<br/>

Blinking stars are coming out;<br/>

No one is moving but the wind;<br/>

It is no use to cry or shout,<br/>

All the world is still as a mouse;<br/>

One thing only eases her mind:<br/>

"Father knows I'm not in the house!"<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="much-and-more" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Much and More</h2>
<p>When thy heart, love-filled, grows graver,<br/>

  And eternal bliss looks nearer,<br/>

Ask thy heart, nor show it favour,<br/>

  Is the gift or giver dearer?<br/>
</p>

<p>Love, love on; love higher, deeper;<br/>

  Let love's ocean close above her;<br/>

Only, love thou more love's keeper,<br/>

  More, the love-creating lover.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="hope-and-patience" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Hope and Patience</h2>
<p>An unborn bird lies crumpled and curled,<br/>

A-dreaming of the world.<br/>
</p>

<p>Round it, for castle-wall, a shell<br/>

Is guarding it well.<br/>
</p>

<p><i>Hope</i> is the bird with its dim sensations;
The shell that keeps it alive is <i>Patience</i>.</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-better-thing" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Better Thing</h2>
<p>I took it for a bird of prey that soared<br/>

High over ocean, battled mount, and plain;<br/>

'Twas but a bird-moth, which with limp horns gored<br/>

The invisibly obstructing window-pane!<br/>
</p>

<p>Better than eagle, with far-towering nerve<br/>

But downward bent, greedy, marauding eye,<br/>

Guest of the flowers, thou art: unhurt they serve<br/>

Thee, little angel of a lower sky!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-prisoner" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Prisoner</h2>
<p>The hinges are so rusty<br/>

The door is fixed and fast;<br/>

The windows are so dusty<br/>

The sun looks in aghast:<br/>

Knock out the glass, I pray,<br/>

Or dash the door away,<br/>

Or break the house down bodily,<br/>

And let my soul go free!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-my-lord-and-master" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To My Lord and Master</h2>
<p>Imagination cannot rise above thee;<br/>

Near and afar I see thee, and I love thee;<br/>

My misery away from me I thrust it,<br/>

For thy perfection I behold, and trust it.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-one-unsatisfied" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To One Unsatisfied</h2>
<p>When, with all the loved around thee,<br/>

  Still thy heart says, "I am lonely,"<br/>

It is well; the truth hath found thee:<br/>

  Rest is with the Father only.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-my-god" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To My God</h2>
<p>Oh how oft I wake and find<br/>

  I have been forgetting thee!<br/>

I am never from thy mind:<br/>

  Thou it is that wakest me.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="triolet-1" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Triolet</h2>
<p>Oh that men would praise the Lord<br/>

  For his goodness unto men!<br/>

Forth he sends his saving word,<br/>

  —Oh that men would praise the Lord!—<br/>

And from shades of death abhorred<br/>

  Lifts them up to light again:<br/>

Oh that men would praise the Lord<br/>

  For his goodness unto men!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-word-of-god" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Word of God</h2>
<p>Where the bud has never blown<br/>

  Who for scent is debtor?<br/>

Where the spirit rests unknown<br/>

  Fatal is the letter.<br/>
</p>

<p>In thee, Jesus, Godhead-stored,<br/>

  All things we inherit,<br/>

For thou art the very Word<br/>

  And the very Spirit!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="eine-kleine-predigt" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Eine Kleine Predigt</h2>
<p>Graut Euch nicht, Ihr lieben Leute,<br/>

  Vor dem ungeheuren Morgen;<br/>

Wenn es kommt, es ist das Heute,<br/>

  Und der liebe Gott zu sorgen.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-the-life-eternal" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To the Life Eternal</h2>
<p>Thou art my thought, my heart, my being's fortune,<br/>

  The search for thee my growth's first conscious date;<br/>

For nought, for everything, I thee importune;<br/>

  Thou art my all, my origin and fate!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="hope-deferred-2" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Hope Deferred</h2>
<p>"Where is thy crown, O tree of Love?<br/>

  Flowers only bears thy root!<br/>

Will never rain drop from above<br/>

  Divine enough for fruit?"<br/>
</p>

<p>"I dwell in hope that gives good cheer,<br/>

  Twilight my darkest hour;<br/>

For seest thou not that every year<br/>

  I break in better flower?"<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="forgiveness" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Forgiveness</h2>
<p>God gives his child upon his slate a sum—<br/>

  To find eternity in hours and years;<br/>

With both sides covered, back the child doth come,<br/>

  His dim eyes swollen with shed and unshed tears;<br/>

God smiles, wipes clean the upper side and nether,<br/>

And says, "Now, dear, we'll do the sum together!"<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="dejection" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Dejection</h2>
<p>O Father, I am in the dark,<br/>

  My soul is heavy-bowed:<br/>

I send my prayer up like a lark,<br/>

  Up through my vapoury shroud,<br/>

        To find thee,<br/>

        And remind thee<br/>

I am thy child, and thou my father,<br/>

Though round me death itself should gather.<br/>
</p>

<p>Lay thy loved hand upon my head,<br/>

  Let thy heart beat in mine;<br/>

One thought from thee, when all seems dead,<br/>

  Will make the darkness shine<br/>

        About me<br/>

        And throughout me!<br/>

And should again the dull night gather,<br/>

I'll cry again, <i>Thou art my father</i>.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="appeal" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Appeal</h2>
<p>If in my arms I bore my child,<br/>

  Would he cry out for fear<br/>

Because the night was dark and wild<br/>

  And no one else was near?<br/>
</p>

<p>Shall I then treat thee, Father, as<br/>

  My fatherhood would grieve?<br/>

I will be hopeful, though, alas,<br/>

  I cannot quite believe!<br/>
</p>

<p>I had no power, no wish to be:<br/>

  Thou madest me half blind!<br/>

The darkness comes! I cling to thee!<br/>

  Be thou my perfect mind.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="mother-nature" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Mother Nature</h2>
<p>  Beautiful mother is busy all day,<br/>

So busy she neither can sing nor say;<br/>

But lovely thoughts, in a ceaseless flow,<br/>

Through her eyes, and her ears, and her bosom go—<br/>

Motion, sight, and sound, and scent,<br/>

Weaving a royal, rich content.<br/>
</p>

<p>  When night is come, and her children sleep,<br/>

Beautiful mother her watch doth keep;<br/>

With glowing stars in her dusky hair<br/>

Down she sits to her music rare;<br/>

And her instrument that never fails,<br/>

Is the hearts and the throats of her nightingales.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="king-cole" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">King Cole</h2>
<p>King Cole he reigned in Aureoland,<br/>

But the sceptre was seldom in his hand<br/>
</p>

<p>Far oftener was there his golden cup—<br/>

He ate too much, but he drank all up!<br/>
</p>

<p>To be called a king and to be a king,<br/>

That is one thing and another thing!<br/>
</p>

<p>So his majesty's head began to shake,<br/>

And his hands and his feet to swell and ache,<br/>
</p>

<p>The doctors were called, but they dared not say<br/>

Your majesty drinks too much Tokay;<br/>
</p>

<p>So out of the king's heart died all mirth,<br/>

And he thought there was nothing good on earth.<br/>
</p>

<p>Then up rose the fool, whose every word<br/>

Was three parts wise and one part absurd.<br/>
</p>

<p>Nuncle, he said, never mind the gout;<br/>

I will make you laugh till you laugh it out.<br/>
</p>

<p>King Cole pushed away his full gold plate:<br/>

The jester he opened the palace gate,<br/>
</p>

<p>Brought in a cold man, with hunger grim,<br/>

And on the dais-edge seated him;<br/>
</p>

<p>Then caught up the king's own golden plate,<br/>

And set it beside him: oh, how he ate!<br/>
</p>

<p>And the king took note, with a pleased surprise,<br/>

That he ate with his mouth and his cheeks and his eyes,<br/>
</p>

<p>With his arms and his legs and his body whole,<br/>

And laughed aloud from his heart and soul.<br/>
</p>

<p>Then from his lordly chair got up,<br/>

And carried the man his own gold cup;<br/>
</p>

<p>The goblet was deep and wide and full,<br/>

The poor man drank like a cow at a pool.<br/>
</p>

<p>Said the king to the jester—I call it well done<br/>

To drink with two mouths instead of one!<br/>
</p>

<p>Said the king to himself, as he took his seat,<br/>

It is quite as good to feed as to eat!<br/>
</p>

<p>It is better, I do begin to think,<br/>

To give to the thirsty than to drink!<br/>
</p>

<p>And now I have thought of it, said the king,<br/>

There might be more of this kind of thing!<br/>
</p>

<p>The fool heard. The king had not long to wait:<br/>

The fool cried aloud at the palace-gate;<br/>
</p>

<p>The ragged and wretched, the hungry and thin,<br/>

Loose in their clothes and tight in their skin,<br/>
</p>

<p>Gathered in shoals till they filled the hall,<br/>

And the king and the fool they fed them all;<br/>
</p>

<p>And as with good things their plates they piled<br/>

The king grew merry as a little child.<br/>
</p>

<p>On the morrow, early, he went abroad<br/>

And sought poor folk in their own abode—<br/>
</p>

<p>Sought them till evening foggy and dim,<br/>

Did not wait till they came to him;<br/>
</p>

<p>And every day after did what he could,<br/>

Gave them work and gave them food.<br/>
</p>

<p>Thus he made war on the wintry weather,<br/>

And his health and the spring came back together.<br/>
</p>

<p>But, lo, a change had passed on the king,<br/>

Like the change of the world in that same spring!<br/>
</p>

<p>His face had grown noble and good to see,<br/>

And the crown sat well on his majesty.<br/>
</p>

<p>Now he ate enough, and ate no more,<br/>

He drank about half what he drank before,<br/>
</p>

<p>He reigned a real king in Aureoland,<br/>

Reigned with his head and his heart and his hand.<br/>
</p>

<p>All this through the fool did come to pass.<br/>

And every Christmas-eve that was,<br/>
</p>

<p>The palace-gates stood open wide<br/>

And the poor came in from every side,<br/>
</p>

<p>And the king rose up and served them duly,<br/>

And his people loved him very truly.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="said-and-did" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Said and Did</h2>
<p>Said the boy as he read, "I too will be bold,<br/>

  I will fight for the truth and its glory!"<br/>

He went to the playground, and soon had told<br/>

  A very cowardly story!<br/>
</p>

<p>Said the girl as she read, "That was grand, I declare!<br/>

  What a true, what a lovely, sweet soul!"<br/>

In half-an-hour she went up the stair,<br/>

  Looking as black as a coal!<br/>
</p>

<p>"The mean little wretch, I wish I could fling<br/>

  This book at his head!" said another;<br/>

Then he went and did the same ugly thing<br/>

  To his own little trusting brother!<br/>
</p>

<p>Alas for him who sees a thing grand<br/>

  And does not fit himself to it!<br/>

But the meanest act, on sea or on land,<br/>

  Is to find a fault, and then do it!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="dr-doddridges-dog" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Dr. Doddridge's Dog</h2>
<p>"What! you Dr. Doddridge's dog, and not know who made you?"</p>

<p>My little dog, who blessed you<br/>

  With such white toothy-pegs?<br/>

And who was it that dressed you<br/>

  In such a lot of legs?<br/>
</p>

<p>Perhaps he never told you!<br/>

  Perhaps you know quite well,<br/>

And beg me not to scold you<br/>

  For you can't speak to tell!<br/>
</p>

<p>I'll tell you, little brother,<br/>

  In case you do not know:—<br/>

One only, not another,<br/>

  Could make us two just so.<br/>
</p>

<p>You love me?—Quiet!—I'm proving!—<br/>

  It must be God above<br/>

That filled those eyes with loving:<br/>

  He was the first to love!<br/>
</p>

<p>One day he'll stop all sadness—<br/>

  Hark to the nightingale!<br/>

Oh blessed God of gladness!—<br/>

  Come, doggie, wag your tail!<br/>
</p>

<p>That's—Thank you, God!—He gave you<br/>

  Of life this little taste;<br/>

And with more life he'll save you,<br/>

  Not let you go to waste!<br/>
</p>

<p>He says now, Live together,<br/>

  And share your bite and sup;<br/>

And then he'll say, Come hither—<br/>

  And lift us both high up.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-girl-that-lost-things" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Girl That Lost Things</h2>
<p>There was a girl that lost things—<br/>

  Nor only from her hand;<br/>

She lost, indeed—why, most things,<br/>

  As if they had been sand!<br/>
</p>

<p>She said, "But I must use them,<br/>

  And can't look after all!<br/>

Indeed I did not lose them,<br/>

  I only let them fall!"<br/>
</p>

<p>That's how she lost her thimble,<br/>

  It fell upon the floor:<br/>

Her eyes were very nimble<br/>

  But she never saw it more.<br/>
</p>

<p>And then she lost her dolly,<br/>

  Her very doll of all!<br/>

That loss was far from jolly,<br/>

  But worse things did befall.<br/>
</p>

<p>She lost a ring of pearls<br/>

  With a ruby in them set;<br/>

But the dearest girl of girls<br/>

  Cried only, did not fret.<br/>
</p>

<p>And then she lost her robin;<br/>

  Ah, that was sorrow dire!<br/>

He hopped along, and—bob in—<br/>

  Hopped bob into the fire!<br/>
</p>

<p>And once she lost a kiss<br/>

  As she came down the stair;<br/>

But that she did not miss,<br/>

  For sure it was somewhere!<br/>
</p>

<p>Just then she lost her heart too,<br/>

  But did so well without it<br/>

She took that in good part too,<br/>

  And said—not much about it.<br/>
</p>

<p>But when she lost her health<br/>

  She did feel rather poor,<br/>

Till in came loads of wealth<br/>

  By quite another door!<br/>
</p>

<p>And soon she lost a dimple<br/>

  That was upon her cheek,<br/>

But that was very simple—<br/>

  She was so thin and weak!<br/>
</p>

<p>And then she lost her mother,<br/>

  And thought that she was dead;<br/>

Sure there was not another<br/>

  On whom to lay her head!<br/>
</p>

<p>And then she lost her self—<br/>

  But that she threw away;<br/>

And God upon his shelf<br/>

  It carefully did lay.<br/>
</p>

<p>And then she lost her sight,<br/>

  And lost all hope to find it;<br/>

But a fountain-well of light<br/>

  Came flashing up behind it.<br/>
</p>

<p>At last she lost the world:<br/>

  In a black and stormy wind<br/>

Away from her it whirled—<br/>

  But the loss how could she mind?<br/>
</p>

<p>For with it she lost her losses,<br/>

  Her aching and her weeping,<br/>

Her pains and griefs and crosses,<br/>

  And all things not worth keeping;<br/>
</p>

<p>It left her with the lost things<br/>

  Her heart had still been craving;<br/>

'Mong them she found—why, most things,<br/>

  And all things worth the saving.<br/>
</p>

<p>She found her precious mother,<br/>

  Who not the least had died;<br/>

And then she found that other<br/>

  Whose heart had hers inside.<br/>
</p>

<p>And next she found the kiss<br/>

  She lost upon the stair;<br/>

'Twas sweeter far, I guess,<br/>

  For ripening in that air.<br/>
</p>

<p>She found her self, all mended,<br/>

  New-drest, and strong, and white;<br/>

She found her health, new-blended<br/>

  With a radiant delight.<br/>
</p>

<p>She found her little robin:<br/>

  He made his wings go flap,<br/>

Came fluttering, and went bob in,<br/>

  Went bob into her lap.<br/>
</p>

<p>So, girls that cannot keep things,<br/>

  Be patient till to-morrow;<br/>

And mind you don't beweep things<br/>

  That are not worth such sorrow;<br/>
</p>

<p>For the Father great of fathers,<br/>

  Of mothers, girls, and boys,<br/>

In his arms his children gathers,<br/>

  And sees to all their toys.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-make-believe" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Make-Believe</h2>
<p>I will think as thinks the rabbit:—</p>

<p>   Oh, delight<br/>

   In the night<br/>

   When the moon<br/>

   Sets the tune<br/>

   To the woods!<br/>

   And the broods<br/>

   All run out,<br/>

   Frisk about,<br/>

   Go and come,<br/>

   Beat the drum—<br/>

   Here in groups,<br/>

   There in troops!<br/>

   Now there's one!<br/>

   Now it's gone!<br/>

   There are none!<br/>

And now they are dancing like chaff!<br/>

I look, and I laugh,<br/>

But sit by my door, and keep to my habit—<br/>

A wise, respectable, clean-furred old rabbit!<br/>
</p>

<p>   Now I'm going,<br/>

      Business calls me out—<br/>

   Going, going,<br/>

   Very knowing,<br/>

      Slow, long-heeled, and stout,<br/>

      Loping, lumbering,<br/>

   Nipping, numbering,<br/>

   Head on this side and on that,<br/>

   Along the pathway footed flat,<br/>

   Through the meadow, through the heather,<br/>

   Through the rich dusky weather—<br/>

      Big stars and little moon!<br/>
</p>

<p>  Dews are lighting down in crowds,<br/>

  Odours rising in thin clouds,<br/>

    Night has all her chords in tune—<br/>

  The very night for us, God's rabbits,<br/>

  Suiting all our little habits!<br/>

Wind not loud, but playful with our fur,<br/>

Just a cool, a sweet, a gentle stir!<br/>

And all the way not one rough bur,<br/>

But the dewiest, freshest grasses,<br/>

That whisper thanks to every foot that passes!<br/>
</p>

<p>  I, the king the rest call Mappy,<br/>

  Canter on, composed and happy,<br/>

  Till I come where there is plenty<br/>

  For a varied meal and dainty.<br/>

  Is it cabbage, I grab it;<br/>

  Is it parsley, I nab it;<br/>

  Is it carrot, I mar it;<br/>

  The turnip I turn up<br/>

  And hollow and swallow;<br/>

  A lettuce? Let us eat it!<br/>

  A beetroot? Let's beat it!<br/>

  If you are juicy,<br/>

  Sweet sir, I will use you!<br/>

  For all kinds of corn-crop<br/>

  I have a born crop!<br/>

  Are you a green top?<br/>

  You shall be gleaned up!<br/>

  Sucking and feazing,<br/>

  Crushing and squeezing<br/>

  All that is feathery,<br/>

  Crisp, not leathery,<br/>

  Juicy and bruisy—<br/>

  All comes proper<br/>

  To my little hopper<br/>

  Still on the dance,<br/>

    Driven by hunger and drouth!<br/>
</p>

<p>All is welcome to my crunching,<br/>

Finding, grinding,<br/>

Milling, munching,<br/>

Gobbling, lunching,<br/>

Fore-toothed, three-lipped mouth—<br/>

Eating side way, round way, flat way,<br/>

Eating this way, eating that way,<br/>

Every way at once!<br/>
</p>

<p>Hark to the rain!—<br/>

Pattering, clattering,<br/>

The cabbage leaves battering,<br/>

Down it comes amain!—<br/>

Home we hurry<br/>

Hop and scurry,<br/>

And in with a flurry!<br/>

Hustling, jostling<br/>

Out of the airy land<br/>

Into the dry warm sand;<br/>

Our family white tails,<br/>

The last of our vitals,<br/>

Following hard with a whisk to them,<br/>

And with a great sense of risk to them!<br/>
</p>

<p>Hear to it pouring!<br/>

Hear the thunder roaring<br/>

Far off and up high,<br/>

While we all lie<br/>

So warm and so dry<br/>

In the mellow dark,<br/>

Where never a spark,<br/>

White or rosy or blue,<br/>

Of the sheeting, fleeting,<br/>

Forking, frightening,<br/>

Lashing lightning<br/>

Ever can come through!<br/>
</p>

<p>Let the wind chafe<br/>

In the trees overhead,<br/>

We are quite safe<br/>

In our dark, yellow bed!<br/>

Let the rain pour!<br/>

It never can bore<br/>

A hole in our roof—<br/>

It is waterproof!<br/>

So is the cloak<br/>

We always carry,<br/>

We furry folk,<br/>

In sandhole or quarry!<br/>

It is perfect bliss<br/>

To lie in a nest<br/>

So soft as this,<br/>

All so warmly drest!<br/>

No one to flurry you!<br/>

No one to hurry you!<br/>

No one to scurry you!<br/>

Holes plenty to creep in!<br/>

All day to sleep in!<br/>

All night to roam in!<br/>

Gray dawn to run home in!<br/>

And all the days and nights to come after—<br/>

All the to-morrows for hind-legs and laughter!<br/>
</p>

<p>Now the rain is over,<br/>

We are out again,<br/>

Every merry, leaping rover,<br/>

On his right leg and his wrong leg,<br/>

On his doubled, shortened long leg,<br/>

Floundering amain!<br/>

Oh, it is merry<br/>

And jolly—yes, very!<br/>
</p>

<p>But what—what is that?<br/>

What can he be at?<br/>

Is it a cat?<br/>

Ah, my poor little brother,<br/>

He's caught in the trap<br/>

That goes-to with a snap!<br/>

Ah me! there was never,<br/>

Nor will be for ever—<br/>

There was never such another,<br/>

Such a funny, funny bunny,<br/>

Such a frisking, such a whisking,<br/>

Such a frolicking brother!<br/>

He's screeching, beseeching!<br/>

They're going to—<br/>
</p>

<p>Ah, my poor foot,<br/>

It is caught in a root!<br/>

No, no! 'tis a trap<br/>

That goes-to with a snap!<br/>

Ah me, I'm forsaken!<br/>

Ah me, I am taken!<br/>

I am screeching, beseeching!<br/>

They are going to—<br/>
</p>

<p>No more! no more! I must stop this play,<br/>

Be a boy again, and kneel down and pray<br/>

To the God of sparrows and rabbits and men,<br/>

Who never lets any one out of his ken—<br/>

It must be so, though it be bewild'ring—<br/>

To save his dear beasts from his cruel children!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-christmas-child" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Christmas Child</h2>
<p>"Little one, who straight hast come<br/>

Down the heavenly stair,<br/>

Tell us all about your home,<br/>

And the father there."<br/>
</p>

<p>"He is such a one as I,<br/>

Like as like can be.<br/>

Do his will, and, by and by,<br/>

Home and him you'll see."<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-christmas-prayer" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Christmas Prayer</h2>
<p>Loving looks the large-eyed cow,<br/>

Loving stares the long-eared ass<br/>

At Heaven's glory in the grass!<br/>

Child, with added human birth<br/>

Come to bring the child of earth<br/>

Glad repentance, tearful mirth,<br/>

And a seat beside the hearth<br/>

At the Father's knee—<br/>

Make us peaceful as thy cow;<br/>

Make us patient as thine ass;<br/>

Make us quiet as thou art now;<br/>

Make us strong as thou wilt be.<br/>

Make us always know and see<br/>

We are his as well as thou.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="no-end-of-no-story" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">No End of No-Story</h2>
<p>There is a river
whose waters run asleep
run run ever
singing in the shallows
dumb in the hollows
sleeping so deep
and all the swallows
that dip their feathers
in the hollows
or in the shallows
are the merriest swallows
and the nests they make
with the clay they cake
with the water they shake
from their wings that rake
the water out of the shallows
or out of the hollows
will hold together
in any weather
and the swallows
are the merriest fellows
and have the merriest children
and are built very narrow
like the head of an arrow
to cut the air
and go just where
the nicest water is flowing
and the nicest dust is blowing
and each so narrow
like the head of an arrow
is a wonderful barrow
to carry the mud he makes
for his children's sakes
from the wet water flowing
and the dry dust blowing
to build his nest
for her he loves best
and the wind cakes it
the sun bakes it
into a nest
for the rest
of her he loves best
and all their merry children
each little fellow
with a beak as yellow
as the buttercups growing
beside the flowing
of the singing river
always and ever
growing and blowing
as fast as the sheep
awake or asleep
crop them and crop
and cannot stop
their yellowness blowing
nor yet the growing
of the obstinate daisies
the little white praises
they grow and they blow
they spread out their crown
and they praise the sun
and when he goes down
their praising is done
they fold up their crown
and sleep every one
till over the plain
he is shining amain
and they're at it again
praising and praising
such low songs raising
that no one can hear them
but the sun so near them
and the sheep that bite them
but do not fright them
are the quietest sheep
awake or asleep
with the merriest bleat
and the little lambs
are the merriest lambs
forgetting to eat
for the frolic in their feet
and the lambs and their dams
are the whitest sheep
with the woolliest wool
for the swallow to pull
when he makes his nest
for her he loves best
and they shine like snow
in the grasses that grow
by the singing river
that sings for ever
and the sheep and the lambs
are merry for ever
because the river
sings and they drink it
and the lambs and their dams
would any one think it
are bright and white
because of their diet
which gladdens them quiet
for what they bite
is buttercups yellow
and daisies white
and grass as green
as the river can make it
with wind as mellow
to kiss it and shake it
as never was known
but here in the hollows
beside the river
where all the swallows
are the merriest fellows
and the nests they make
with the clay they cake
in the sunshine bake
till they are like bone
and as dry in the wind
as a marble stone
dried in the wind
the sweetest wind
that blows by the river
flowing for ever
and who shall find
whence comes the wind
that blows on the hollows
and over the shallows
where dip the swallows
and comes and goes
and the sweet life blows
into the river
that sings as it flows
and the sweet life blows
into the sheep
awake or asleep
with the woolliest wool
and the trailingest tails
and never fails
gentle and cool
to wave the wool
and to toss the grass
as the lambs and the sheep
over it pass
and tug and bite
with their teeth so white
and then with the sweep
of their trailing tails
smooth it again
and it grows amain
and amain it grows
and the wind that blows
tosses the swallows
over the hollows
and over the shallows
and blows the sweet life
and the joy so rife
into the swallows
that skim the shallows
and have the yellowest children
and the wind that blows
is the life of the river
that flows for ever
and washes the grasses
still as it passes
and feeds the daisies
the little white praises
and buttercups sunny
with butter and honey
that whiten the sheep
awake or asleep
that nibble and bite
and grow whiter than white
and merry and quiet
on such good diet
watered by the river
and tossed for ever
by the wind that tosses
the wool and the grasses
and the swallow that crosses
with all the swallows
over the shallows
dipping their wings
to gather the water
and bake the cake
for the wind to make
as hard as a bone
and as dry as a stone
and who shall find
whence comes the wind
that blows from behind
and ripples the river
that flows for ever
and still as it passes
waves the grasses
and cools the daisies
the white sun praises
that feed the sheep
awake or asleep
and give them their wool
for the swallows to pull
a little away
to mix with the clay
that cakes to a nest
for those they love best
and all the yellow children
soon to go trying
their wings at the flying
over the hollows
and over the shallows
with all the swallows
that do not know
whence the wind doth blow
that comes from behind
a blowing wind.</p>
		</article>
		<article id="hame" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Hame</h2>
<p>The warl it's dottit wi' hames<br/>

  As thick as gowans o' the green,<br/>

Aye bonnier ilk ane nor the lave<br/>

  To him wha there opent his een.<br/>
</p>

<p>An' mony an' bonny's the hame<br/>

  That lies neth auld Scotlan's crests,<br/>

Her hills an' her mountains they are the sides<br/>

  O' a muckle nest o' nests.<br/>
</p>

<p>His lies i' the dip o' a muir<br/>

  Wi' a twa three elder trees,<br/>

A lanely cot wi' a sough o' win',<br/>

  An' a simmer bum o' bees;<br/>
</p>

<p>An' mine in a bloomin strath,<br/>

  Wi' a river rowin by,<br/>

Wi' the green corn glintin i' the sun,<br/>

  An' a lowin o' the kye;<br/>
</p>

<p>An' yours whaur the chimleys auld<br/>

  Stan up i' the gloamin pale<br/>

Wi' the line o' a gran' sierra drawn<br/>

  On the lift as sharp's wi' a nail.<br/>
</p>

<p>But whether by ingle-neuk<br/>

  On a creepie ye sookit yer thumb,<br/>

Dreamin, an' watchin the blue peat-reek<br/>

  Wamle oot up the muckle lum,<br/>
</p>

<p>Or yer wee feet sank i' the fur<br/>

  Afore a bleezin hearth,<br/>

Wi' the curtains drawn, shuttin oot the toon—<br/>

  Aberdeen, Auld Reekie, or Perth,<br/>
</p>

<p>It's a naething, nor here nor there;<br/>

  Leal Scots are a'ane thegither!<br/>

Ilk ane has a hame, an' it's a' the same<br/>

  Whether in clover or heather!<br/>
</p>

<p>An' the hert aye turns to the hame—<br/>

  That's whaur oor ain folk wons;<br/>

An' gien hame binna hame, the hert bauds ayont<br/>

  Abune the stars an' the suns.<br/>
</p>

<p>For o' a' the hames there's a hame<br/>

  Herty an' warm an' wide,<br/>

Whaur a' that maks hame ower the big roun earth<br/>

  Gangs til its hame to bide.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-sang-o-the-auld-fowk" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Sang O' the Auld Fowk</h2>
<p>Doon cam the sunbeams, and up gaed the stour,<br/>

As we spangt ower the road at ten mile the hoor,<br/>

The horse wasna timmer, the cart wasna strae,<br/>

And little cared we for the burn or the brae.<br/>
</p>

<p>We war young, and the hert in's was strang i' the loup,<br/>

And deeper in yet was the courage and houp;<br/>

The sun was gey aft in a clood, but the heat<br/>

Cam throu, and dried saftly the doon fa'en weet.<br/>
</p>

<p>Noo, the horsie's some tired, but the road's nae sae lang;<br/>

The sun comes na oot, but he's no in a fang:<br/>

The nicht's comin on, but hame's no far awa;<br/>

We hae come a far road, but hae payit for a'.<br/>
</p>

<p>For ane has been wi' us—and sometimes 'maist seen,<br/>

Wha's cared for us better nor a' oor four e'en;<br/>

He's cared for the horsie, the man, and the wife,<br/>

And we're gaein hame to him for the rest o' oor life.<br/>
</p>

<p>Doon comes the water, and up gangs nae stour;<br/>

We creep ower the road at twa mile the hoor;<br/>

But oor herts they are canty, for ane's to the fore<br/>

Wha was and wha is and will be evermore.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-auld-mans-prayer" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Auld Man's Prayer</h2>
<p>Lord, I'm an auld man,<br/>

  An' I'm deein!<br/>

An' do what I can<br/>

  I canna help bein<br/>

Some feart at the thoucht!<br/>

I'm no what I oucht!<br/>

An' thou art sae gran',<br/>

Me but an auld man!<br/>
</p>

<p>I haena gotten muckle<br/>

  Guid o' the warld;<br/>

Though siller a puckle<br/>

  Thegither I hae harlt,<br/>

Noo I maun be rid o' 't,<br/>

The ill an' the guid o' 't!<br/>

An' I wud—I s' no back frae 't—<br/>

Rather put til 't nor tak frae 't!<br/>
</p>

<p>It's a pity a body<br/>

  Coudna haud on here,<br/>

Puttin cloddy to cloddy<br/>

  Till he had a bit lan' here!—<br/>

But eh I'm forgettin<br/>

Whaur the tide's settin!<br/>

It'll pusion my prayer<br/>

Till it's no worth a hair!<br/>
</p>

<p>It's awfu, it's awfu<br/>

  To think 'at I'm gaein<br/>

Whaur a' 's ower wi' the lawfu,<br/>

  Whaur's an en' til a' haein!<br/>

It's gruesome to en'<br/>

The thing 'at ye ken,<br/>

An' gang to begin til<br/>

What ye canna see intil!<br/>
</p>

<p>Thou may weel turn awa,<br/>

  Lord, an' say it's a shame<br/>

'At noo I suld ca'<br/>

  On thy licht-giein name<br/>

Wha my lang life-time<br/>

Wud no see a stime!<br/>

An' the fac' there's no fleein—<br/>

But hae pity—I'm deein!<br/>
</p>

<p>I'm thine ain efter a'—<br/>

  The waur shame I'm nae better!<br/>

Dinna sen' me awa,<br/>

  Dinna curse a puir cratur!<br/>

I never jist cheatit—<br/>

I own I defeatit,<br/>

Gart his poverty tell<br/>

On him 'at maun sell!<br/>
</p>

<p>Oh that my probation<br/>

  Had lain i' some region<br/>

Whaur was less consideration<br/>

  For gear mixt wi' religion!<br/>

It's the mixin the twa<br/>

'At jist ruins a'!<br/>

That kirk's the deil's place<br/>

Whaur gear glorifees grace!<br/>
</p>

<p>I hae learnt nought but ae thing<br/>

  'At life's but a span!<br/>

I hae warslet for naething!<br/>

  I hae noucht i' my han'!<br/>

At the fut o' the stairs<br/>

I'm sayin my prayers:—<br/>

Lord, lat the auld loon<br/>

Confess an' lie doon.<br/>
</p>

<p>I hae been an ill man—<br/>

  Micht hae made a guid dog!<br/>

I could rin though no stan—<br/>

  Micht hae won throu a bog!<br/>

But 't was ower easy gaein,<br/>

An' I set me to playin!<br/>

Dinna sen' me awa<br/>

Whaur's no licht ava!<br/>
</p>

<p>Forgie me an' hap me!<br/>

  I hae been a sharp thorn.<br/>

But, oh, dinna drap me!<br/>

  I'll be coothie the morn!<br/>

To my brither John<br/>

Oh, lat me atone—<br/>

An' to mair I cud name<br/>

Gien I'd time to tak blame!<br/>
</p>

<p>I hae wullt a' my gear<br/>

  To my cousin Lippit:<br/>

She needs 't no a hair,<br/>

  An' wud haud it grippit!<br/>

But I'm thinkin 't 'll be better<br/>

To gie 't a bit scatter<br/>

Whaur it winna canker<br/>

But mak a bit anchor!<br/>
</p>

<p>Noo I s'try to sit loose<br/>

  To the warld an' its thrang!<br/>

Lord, come intil my hoose,<br/>

  For Sathan sall gang!<br/>

Awa here I sen' him—<br/>

Oh, haud the hoose agane him,<br/>

Or thou kens what he'll daur—<br/>

He'll be back wi' seven waur!<br/>
</p>

<p>Lord, I knock at thy yett!<br/>

  I hear the dog yowlin!<br/>

Lang latna me wait—<br/>

  My conscience is growlin!<br/>

Whaur but to thee<br/>

Wha was broken for me,<br/>

But to thee, Lord, sae gran',<br/>

Can flee an auld man!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="granny-canty" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Granny Canty</h2>
<p>"What maks ye sae canty, granny dear?<br/>

Has some kin' body been for ye to speir?<br/>

Ye luik as smilin an' fain an' willin<br/>

As gien ye had fun a bonny shillin!"<br/>
</p>

<p>"Ye think I luik canty, my bonny man,<br/>

Sittin watchin the last o' the sun sae gran'?<br/>

Weel, an' I'm thinkin ye're no that wrang,<br/>

For 'deed i' my hert there's a wordless sang!<br/>
</p>

<p>"Ken ye the meanin o' <i>canty</i>, my dow?<br/>

It's bein i' the humour o' singin, I trow!<br/>

An' though nae sang ever crosses my lips<br/>

I'm aye like to sing whan anither sun dips.<br/>
</p>

<p>"For the time, wee laddie, the time grows lang<br/>

Sin' I saw the man wha's sicht was my sang—<br/>

Yer gran'father, that's—an' the sun's last glim<br/>

Says aye to me, 'Lass, ye're a mile nearer him!<br/>
</p>

<p>"For he's hame afore me, an' lang's the road!<br/>

He fain at my side wud hae timed his plod,<br/>

But, eh, he was sent for, an' hurried awa!<br/>

Noo, I'm thinkin he's harkin to hear my fit-fa'."<br/>
</p>

<p>"But, grannie, yer face is sae lirkit an' thin,<br/>

Wi' a doun-luikin nose an' an up-luikin chin,<br/>

An' a mou clumpit up oot o' sicht atween,<br/>

Like the witherin half o' an auld weary mune!"<br/>
</p>

<p>"Hoot, laddie, ye needna glower yersel blin'!<br/>

The body 'at loos, sees far throu the skin;<br/>

An', believe me or no, the hoor's comin amain<br/>

Whan ugly auld fowk 'ill be bonny again.<br/>
</p>

<p>"For there is <i>ane</i>—an' it's no my dear man,<br/>

Though I loo him as nane but a wife's hert can—<br/>

The joy o' beholdin wha's gran' lovely face<br/>

Til mak me like him in a' 'at's ca'd grace.<br/>
</p>

<p>"But what I am like I carena a strae<br/>

Sae lang as I'm <i>his</i>, an' what <i>he</i> wud hae!<br/>

Be ye a guid man, John, an' ae day ye'll ken<br/>

What maks granny canty yont four score an' ten."<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="time" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Time</h2>
<p>A lang-backit, spilgie, fuistit auld carl<br/>

Gangs a' nicht rakin athort the warl<br/>

Wi' a pock on his back, luikin hungry an' lean,<br/>

His crook-fingert han' aye followin his e'en:<br/>

He gathers up a'thing that canna but fa'—<br/>

Intil his bag wi' 't, an' on, an' awa!<br/>

Soot an' snaw! soot an' snaw!—<br/>

Intil his bag wi' 't, an' on, an' awa!<br/>
</p>

<p>But whan he comes to the wa' o' the warl,<br/>

Spangs up it, like lang-leggit spidder, the carl;<br/>

Up gangs his pock wi' him, humpit ahin,<br/>

For naething fa's oot 'at ance he pat in;<br/>

Syne he warstles doon ootside the flamin wa',<br/>

His bag 'maist the deith o' him, pangt like a ba';<br/>

Soot an' snaw! soot an' snaw!<br/>

His bag 'maist throttlin him, pangt like a ba'!<br/>
</p>

<p>Doon he draps weary upon a laigh rock,<br/>

Flingin aside him his muckle-mou'd pock:<br/>

An' there he sits, his heid in his han',<br/>

Like a broken-hertit, despairin man;<br/>

Him air his pock no bonny, na, na!<br/>

Him an' his pock an ugsome twa!<br/>

Soot an' snaw! soot an' snaw!<br/>

Him an' his pock an ugsome twa!<br/>
</p>

<p>But sune 's the first ray o' the sunshine bare<br/>

Lichts on the carl, what see ye there?<br/>

An angel set on eternity's brink,<br/>

Wi' e'en to gar the sun himsel blink;<br/>

By his side a glintin, glimmerin urn,<br/>

Furth frae wha's mou rins a liltin burn:—<br/>

Soot an' snaw! soot an' snaw!<br/>

The dirt o' the warl rins in glory awa!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="what-the-auld-fowk-are-thinkin" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">What the Auld Fowk Are Thinkin</h2>
<p>The bairns i' their beds, worn oot wi' nae wark,<br/>

  Are sleepin, nor ever an eelid winkin;<br/>

The auld fowk lie still wi' their een starin stark,<br/>

  An' the mirk pang-fou o' the things they are thinkin.<br/>
</p>

<p>Whan oot o' ilk corner the bairnies they keek,<br/>

  Lauchin an' daffin, airms loosin an' linkin,<br/>

The auld fowk they watch frae the warm ingle-cheek,<br/>

  But the bairns little think what the auld fowk are thinkin.<br/>
</p>

<p>Whan the auld fowk sit quaiet at the reet o' a stook,<br/>

  I' the sunlicht their washt een blinterin an' blinkin,<br/>

Fowk scythin, or bin'in, or shearin wi' heuk<br/>

  Carena a strae what the auld fowk are thinkin.<br/>
</p>

<p>At the kirk, whan the minister's dreich an' dry,<br/>

  His fardens as gien they war gowd guineas chinkin,<br/>

An' the young fowk are noddin, or fidgetin sly,<br/>

  Naebody kens what the auld fowk are thinkin.<br/>
</p>

<p>Whan the young fowk are greitin aboot the bed<br/>

  Whaur like water throu san' the auld life is sinkin,<br/>

An' some wud say the last word was said,<br/>

  The auld fowk smile, an' ken what they're thinkin.<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="greitna-father" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Greitna, Father</h2>
<p>Greitna, father, that I'm gauin,<br/>

  For fu' well ye ken the gaet;<br/>

I' the winter, corn ye're sawin,<br/>

  I' the hairst again ye hae't.<br/>
</p>

<p>I'm gauin hame to see my mither;<br/>

  She'll be weel acquant or this!<br/>

Sair we'll muse at ane anither<br/>

  'Tween the auld word an' new kiss!<br/>
</p>

<p>Love I'm doobtin may be scanty<br/>

  Roun ye efter I'm awa:<br/>

Yon kirkyard has happin plenty<br/>

  Close aside me, green an' braw!<br/>
</p>

<p>An' abune there's room for mony;<br/>

  'Twasna made for ane or twa,<br/>

But was aye for a' an' ony<br/>

  Countin love the best ava.<br/>
</p>

<p>There nane less ye'll be my father;<br/>

  Auld names we'll nor tyne nor spare!<br/>

A' my sonship I maun gather<br/>

  For the Son is king up there.<br/>
</p>

<p>Greitna, father, that I'm gauin,<br/>

  For ye ken fu' well the gaet!<br/>

Here, in winter, cast yer sawin,<br/>

  There, in hairst, again ye hae't!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
		<article id="i-ken-something" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">I Ken Something</h2>
<p>What gars ye sing sae, birdie,<br/>

  As gien ye war lord o' the lift?<br/>

On breid ye're an unco sma' lairdie,<br/>

  But in hicht ye've a kingly gift!<br/>
</p>

<p>A' ye hae to coont yersel rich in<br/>

  'S a wee mawn o' glory-motes!<br/>

The whilk to the throne ye're aye hitchin<br/>

  Wi a lang tow o' sapphire notes!<br/>
</p>

<p>Ay, yer sang's the sang o' an angel<br/>

  For a sinfu' thrapple no meet,<br/>

Like the pipes til a heavenly braingel<br/>

  Whaur they dance their herts intil their feet!<br/>
</p>

<p>But though ye canna behaud, birdie,<br/>

  Ye needna gar a'thing wheesht!<br/>

I'm noucht but a hirplin herdie,<br/>

  But I hae a sang i' my breist!<br/>
</p>

<p>Len' me yer throat to sing throu,<br/>

  Len' me yer wings to gang hie,<br/>

And I'll sing ye a sang a laverock to cow,<br/>

  And for bliss to gar him dee!<br/>
</p>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
